The government of President Álvaro Uribe, the largest recipient of American aid outside the Middle East, has found itself ensnared in a widening scandal as revelations surface of a secret alliance between some of the president's most prominent political supporters and paramilitary death squads.
Testimony this week from Salvatore Mancuso, a former paramilitary commander who admitted to orchestrating the killing of more than 300 people, as well as a document made public on Friday implicating more than a dozen politicians in the pact with paramilitaries, have injected fresh detail into a slow-burning scandal that has caused Colombia's elite political class to shudder in recent weeks.
Senior members of Mr. Uribe's government and Mr. Uribe himself have said that anyone shown to have had illegal ties to the paramilitaries, which terrorized Colombian cities and the countryside in the nation's internal war, which has gone on for decades, and made fortunes in cocaine trafficking, should be prosecuted in courts of law.
The scandal has already touched Mr. Uribe's cabinet, with Senator Álvaro Araújo, the brother of Foreign Minister Maria Consuelo Araújo, under investigation for collaborating with militias.
''If there's someone involved at the highest level, they will be fired,'' Francisco Santos, Colombia's vice president, said in an interview. ''Scrutiny is fine for us,'' Mr. Santos said. ''This country needs to know the whole truth.''
Some of the details coming to light about the breadth of paramilitary activities are the result of a process set in motion by Mr. Uribe's own government, which has allowed paramilitary leaders to confess their crimes and pay reparations in exchange for reduced sentences of no more than eight years in prison.
Though some militia leaders have balked at the deal, much of Colombia has been gripped by the first such confession, that of Mr. Mancuso, a cattleman who helped found the paramilitary movement in the 1980s in an effort to combat leftist guerrillas.
Mr. Mancuso, 48, who studied English at the University of Pittsburgh, wept during the first days of his testimony at a special hearing in Medellín last month. This week, however, he simply read from a statement describing how he oversaw the assassinations of hundreds of people, with some operations made possible with information from military intelligence.
Mr. Mancuso also put Mr. Uribe in the spotlight by saying that militias pressured people to vote for the president in 2002, when Mr. Uribe was first elected. Mr. Uribe responded quickly by going on a national radio network to say he had never sent any emissaries to strike deals with the paramilitaries.
On the heels of Mr. Mancuso's testimony, a document rumored to exist in recent weeks was published in the daily newspaper El Tiempo on Friday. It describes a secret pact in 2001 between Mr. Mancuso, other paramilitary leaders and 11 congressmen, two governors and five mayors, in which those present agreed to work together to forge ''a new social contract,'' largely in order to protect private property rights.
Senator Miguel de la Espriella, one of the signatories to the pact, helped bring the scandal to light last year by disclosing the ties between politicians and paramilitaries. Like other officials implicated in the pact, he said he was forced to sign, raising doubts as what type of legal punishment, if any, they might receive.
''At first we declined to sign, but when they put a man with a rifle next to the document we understood we had no choice,'' Mr. de la Espriella, a member of the Democratic Colombia party, said in an e-mail interview.
Asked why he was the only politician to come forward with details of the secret agreement, Mr. de la Espriella, alluding to widespread suspicions that legislators and government officials had for years worked in tandem with the paramilitaries, responded, ''I told myself that a half-truth doesn't serve anybody, and we should all contribute to the enlightenment of the truth during so many years of war.''
Those who signed the document included not only supporters of Mr. Uribe but also high-ranking officials in the political opposition, pointing to how a growing portion of the political establishment could be tarnished by the scandal.
Some 30,000 paramilitary members have been demobilized during Mr. Uribe's government in recent years. Colombia's military still receives more than $700 million a year in aid from the United States to combat drug trafficking and armed insurgencies.
Two guerrilla groups, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia and the National Liberation Army, still operate in the country. A truck carrying more than 600 pounds of explosives this week destroyed a dairy plant in southern Colombia owned by Nestlé, the Swiss food company, an act that the police attributed to the rebels.
Although the scandal has emerged as the most pressing political challenge to Mr. Uribe's presidency, his approval ratings remain high, at above 60 percent, after five years of rule and a re-election victory last year. Many Colombians credit Mr. Uribe for declining levels of murders and kidnappings and robust economic growth.
However, political analysts here say a steady stream of disclosures related to the paramilitary scandal could diminish Mr. Uribe's credibility, particularly if implicated officials are perceived to have close ties to the president. The scandal has already entangled a former ambassador to Chile and a former head of the intelligence service.
Equally pressing for Mr. Uribe's government could be the scandal's influence on discussions in the United States Congress of aid to Colombia and a trade agreement awaiting Congressional approval that has been signed by Mr. Uribe and President Bush. Political analysts say the Democratic-led Congress is expected to add greater scrutiny of human rights issues in Colombia.
	Try not to make too much of the women driving sport utility vehicles, the baseball diamonds, the thousands of Americans and Britons or the cul-de-sacs with names like Prairie View at the well-guarded headquarters of Saudi Aramco, the world's largest oil company.
''We are not a state within a state,'' Abdallah S. Jumah, Aramco's chief executive, said in an interview as he discussed the company's influence through its control of more than 10 percent of the world's oil production.
While Aramco's importance to the Saudi economy and the global energy industry is hard to underestimate, the company, like other Western-influenced areas of society, has been caught in the cross hairs of Islamic conservative objections to its American-style management approach.
For instance, while women nearly everywhere in Saudi Arabia are required by religious law to dress conservatively in black shawls and prohibited from driving, Aramco's female employees are allowed to wear Western clothing and drive on company property. Old-fashioned American business practices also persist at Aramco, down to the gold watch after 30 years of service.
And in a striking difference from many oil companies that were seized by governments in the developing world in the last century, Aramco never required its American employees to leave. Though its top executives are now Saudis, the official language remains English, making it easier for the 2,000 Americans who work for the company in Saudi Arabia, most of them living in this dusty city across the border from Bahrain.
''We've had a fortunate lifestyle here,'' said Thomas Owen, 51, an American who was born in Dhahran while his father worked for the company and returned to Saudi Arabia after attending college in the United States to work in the purchasing department. ''There's been little incentive to leave.''
The company still provides plentiful perks to attract American employees, who call themselves Aramcons. The benefits for Americans and other expatriates from rich countries include subsidized ranch-style suburban houses at Aramco's compound here, free health and dental care at the company's own hospitals, nearly 40 vacation days a year and free private education for children until high school, when the company will pay 80 percent of boarding-school costs in the United States.
Still, the attacks last year on Western residential compounds in the capital, Riyadh, and heightened awareness of anti-American sentiment throughout Saudi Arabia have reminded Aramco's employees of their tenuous position in Saudi society. Dhahran was the site of a bombing in 1996 that killed 19 American servicemen were killed and injured 64. Reacting to criticism from the religious conservatives and to economic pressures in a nation with growing unemployment, senior executives are purusing efforts to make Aramco more of a Saudi company.
American and European employees, for instance, are no longer assured lifetime employment when they are hired, as Aramco seeks to fulfill obligations to ''Saudi-ize'' its work force of 54,000 by hiring and training more Saudis. Critical areas of Aramco's operations are already entirely run by Saudis, like the futuristic control room where technicians manage the nation's oil output.
The emphasis on employing more Saudis is a priority. Out of a total population of about 24 million, Saudi Arabia has roughly 6 million foreign workers, most from Pakistan, India and other parts of Asia, who perform service jobs. Among Saudi men, the unemployment rate is 10 percent, according to government statistics, but is probably as high as 13 percent, said Nahed Taher, chief economist at National Commercial Bank in Jeddah. (Women, who are prevented from working in most areas of the economy, are not counted in unemployment figures.)
Aramco's field operations are another area where officials are seeking to hire more Saudis. At Shaybah, an isolated oil production site tucked between sand dunes in the windswept Empty Quarter, nearly all of the 300 Aramco staff employees are Saudis, and there is pressure from above to hire more Saudis for the 350 nonstaff contracted positions.
''It's a little like the opposite of outsourcing in other countries where the idea is to have fewer jobs,'' said Mohammed Hatlani, operations manager at Shaybah, which produces 500,000 barrels of oil a day. ''Sometimes these things are beneficial to the kingdom.''
A job at Aramco, to be sure, is a prize for many Saudis, too. Their benefits include relatively high salaries, no-interest home loans and, for some Saudi women, the opportunity to work in a Western-style environment. There is also no income tax in Saudi Arabia, making a stable job at Aramco, the nation's largest single employer, more lucrative.
About 85 percent of the work force is Saudi, up from less than 60 percent three decades ago, when Aramco was controlled by American oil concerns and called the Arabian American Oil Company. It was formed in the 1940's by oilmen from California and Texas.
Saudi Arabia nationalized the company in 1976 but kept its American management largely intact until the mid-1980's, when Ali al-Naimi became the first Saudi chief executive. Mr. Naimi, who later rose to his current position as oil minister, still serves as chairman of Aramco's board, which includes three American directors.
Traditionally loath to allow public scrutiny of its operations, Aramco recently opened up a bit after questions were raised about its reserves and its ability to remain the world's leading oil producer.
Commenting on the company's aversion to debt and its ability to finance its own extensive exploration, Nansen Saleri, the manager of reservoir management, said Aramco operated much as it did when it was owned by four American oil companies.
''We have not changed one iota in this regard,'' said Mr. Saleri, a Turkish-born American citizen based at Aramco's Dhahran headquarters.
Aramco, which produces about eight million barrels a day, generated an estimated $85 billion in oil revenue last year after prices climbed to their highest level in two decades, according to Brad Bourland, chief economist at the Samba Financial Group in Riyadh. The company's financial clout extends to other areas, like its fleet of jet aircraft used to travel inside and outside Saudi Arabia. All its pilots are trained in the United States or Britain.
''It feels almost normal here until you get outside the company and its compounds,'' said Richard Pattee, a native of Tacoma, Wash., who moved to Dhahran in October to pilot the company's new Boeing 737.
Few Aramcons speak fluent Arabic, even among second- or third-generation Americans who grew up in Aramco communities. Still, their privileged and relatively isolated life has at times been punctured by the fear of terrorist attacks when they venture outside the Aramco cocoon.
''I still think we have a safer life than people back in the States, but I'm a lot more aware now than I was before,'' said Cathy Rylands, who was born in Ras Tanura, another Aramco location, and returned to Saudi Arabia after marrying an Aramco employee.
	United States government officials said Friday that they had asked the owner of a hotel here, which is part of an American corporation, to expel a Cuban delegation that was meeting with American oil executives.
The delegation later left the hotel.
The request was made by the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control, which told Starwood Hotels, the owner of the Sheraton Maria Isabel in Mexico City, that American law prohibited it from supplying services to Cuban individuals or companies. The move is the latest in what seems be a hardening by the Bush administration of the trade embargo against Cuba.
A spokeswoman for the Treasury Department, Molly Millerwise, said, ''The hotel acted in accordance with U.S. sanctions.''
A spokeswoman for Starwood Hotels, Nadeen Ayala, confirmed that the Treasury Department had asked the hotel ''to have the Cuban nationals leave.''
Cuban officials are trying to court American petroleum companies to produce oil in the nation's territorial waters after succeeding in attracting exploratory investments from Chinese, Indian and Norwegian energy companies. The meeting of largely Texan oil executives and elite bureaucrats from Havana began Thursday and was to end Saturday.
''It's outrageous that I, as an American citizen, can't go and talk to someone on Mexican soil,'' said Kirby Jones, a former World Bank official and the organizer of the meeting for the U.S.-Cuba Trade Association, a nonprofit group in Washington.
Mr. Jones said this was the 10th meeting he had organized between American executives and Cuban officials, although it was the first to focus on opportunities for American energy companies in Cuba.
Previous meetings had resulted in sales of American food products to Cuba.
This week's meeting, Mr. Jones said, was originally scheduled for December in Cancún, Mexico, but was rescheduled for Mexico City.
Other meetings had been at hotels controlled by American companies, he said, including a hotel in Cancún, where the energy meeting was originally scheduled in December.
''This issue has never come up,'' Mr. Jones said. The American executives will try to meet with the Cubans at another location on Saturday.
Some of the largest American oil companies, including Exxon Mobil and the Valero Energy Corporation, had agreed to meet with Cuban officials on what was thought to be neutral ground at a hotel here in the cradle of Mexican capitalism, a short stroll on Paseo de la Reforma from a Starbucks, the United States Embassy and Mexico's stock exchange. The oil-importing Port of Corpus Christi and American shipping and oil field equipment companies also sent representatives.
''They're sensing a lost opportunity in their own backyard, less than 100 miles from the Florida coast,'' said Mr. Jones.
Although Cuba has suffered from energy shortages since the Soviet Union halted subsidized oil shipments more than a decade ago, its potential as an oil producer has caught attention.
According to the Energy Information Administration, Cuba's proven oil reserves of 750 million barrels exceed those of Sudan, an African nation that has lured large non-American investments to its oil industry despite American economic sanctions in place since 1997.
''We have absolutely no limitations on working with American oil companies. The barriers, unfortunately, come from the other side,'' said Alberto Wong Calvo, director of hydrocarbons at the National Office of Mineral Resources in Cuba.
Oil production in Cuba has surged since an opening to foreign investment in the 1990's, with operations by two Canadian companies, the Sherritt International Corporation and Pebercan Inc., helping to increase output to about 70,000 barrels a day in 2005 from a low of 18,000 barrels a day in 1992. Cuba consumes more than 150,000 barrels a day, with Venezuela providing imports on favorable financial terms.
The American economic embargo on dealings with Cuba prohibits energy companies from reaching exploration deals with Unión Cubapetróleo, Cuba's national oil company. But executives who attended the conference said they were encouraged by the recent relaxation of restrictions on American food exports to Cuba and the implications of Chinese rigs searching for oil this year in Cuban waters off the Straits of Florida.
''It's a difficult road ahead, but we're in the same neighborhood,'' said Amado Durón, director of operations at Valero Energy, the San Antonio-based refining company that could profit from processing Cuban oil at its refineries in Texas, Louisiana or the island of Aruba.
Cuba has been busy reaching exploration deals in the last year with Sinopec, the energy concern controlled by the Chinese government, ONGC Videsh of India and Norsk Hydro of Norway. So far, however, none of the ventures have found large fields like those in the American waters of the Gulf of Mexico.
Repsol of Spain spent $20 million on drilling that came tantalizingly close to a commercial discovery, but executives said oil from the field only partly met expectations. Petrobras of Brazil shelved Cuban exploration efforts after hitting a dry hole in 2001. Still, elevated oil prices have brought frontier plays like Cuba into play.
	OPEC sought to strengthen its grip on world oil markets on Tuesday with an announcement of cuts in production, aggressively displaying its desire to maintain oil prices at their highest sustained level in two decades. Prices rose in response, up more than 3 percent in New York, to $33.87 a barrel.
The formal reduction in output by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, intended to withdraw one million barrels of crude oil a day from the market starting in April and seen by some here as a surprise, would lower the group's production objective to 23.5 million barrels a day. OPEC members also called for stricter adherence to their own quotas in an effort to reduce overproduction by a further 1.5 million barrels a day.
''We will do what it takes to keep the price stable,'' said Ali al-Naimi, the oil minister of Saudi Arabia, OPEC's pivotal and most productive member. ''Saudi Arabia could not countenance waiting until the next meeting to decide on a cut as that would be too late.''
OPEC's announcement emphasized a more forceful approach in its strategy to pre-empt developments that might cause oil prices to decline, like increased production by Russia, Norway or other producing nations that do not belong to OPEC.
Economists said that OPEC's production cut, while unlikely to push prices up enough to damage the American economy, could dampen the recovery somewhat.
''Generally, lower oil prices are better for the economy than higher prices,'' said Joel Prakker, chairman of Macroeconomic Advisers, a consulting firm in St. Louis. ''That said, oil at $33 a barrel is not the end of the economy. It just means it won't grow as fast as if prices were falling or were $20.''
A White House spokesman reacted to OPEC's move on Tuesday with apprehension. Shortly after the output reduction was announced, the spokesman, Trent Duffy, said, ''It is our hope that producers do not take actions that undermine the American economy and American workers, and American consumers for that matter.''
OPEC cited expectations of waning seasonal demand as the main justification for the production cuts, but some individual representatives cited other reasons. Libya's energy minister, Abdulhafid Mahmoud Zlitni, said ''excessive supply'' from growing production by non-OPEC members contributed to the group's decision. OPEC accounts for about a third of global production, down from 65 percent three decades ago.
It remains to be seen in the weeks and months ahead whether OPEC will actually reduce production as much as it says it intends. Together, the steps outlined on Tuesday would effectively cut OPEC output nearly 10 percent, an ambitious objective that was met with skepticism by energy industry executives and analysts who see little incentive for member nations to reduce production while oil prices remain relatively high.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday, benchmark crude oil for March delivery increased $1.04 a barrel, the biggest one-day gain in more than a week. It has traded above $30 a barrel for more than two months, and has sold at levels from $25 to $40 for almost two years. Five years ago, oil traded for $11.30 a barrel.
Prices have remained relatively high even though OPEC's 11 members have regularly surpassed production quotas. This has increased revenue significantly -- every OPEC nation relies on oil for a significant part of its budget, and most OPEC members remain under considerable fiscal pressure.
Venezuela, which has been incapable of meeting its production quota since a government purge last year of managers at the national oil company, devalued its currency by 17 percent this week to generate more revenue from international oil sales. About half of Venezuela's export revenue comes from oil, making production cuts particularly painful.
Officials here in Algeria, the host of Tuesday's gathering, said they were doing all they could to increase domestic oil production to finance antiterrorism efforts and the rebuilding of essential infrastructure wrecked by a decade of civil conflict that has resulted in more than 100,000 deaths.
The Algerian finance minister, Abdelatif Benachenhou, confirmed in an interview on Tuesday that his government intended to lobby with other OPEC members to increase Algeria'as production quota. Mr. Benachenhou also stressed a need for higher oil prices because of the decline of the dollar against the euro.
''Almost 95 percent of our exports are in dollars while more than 90 percent of our imports are in euros,'' he said. ''Algeria is like a household that earns its money in dollars and spends it in euros.''
Such sentiment appears to put much of the responsibility for any short-term cuts in OPEC production on Saudi Arabia, which has greater capacity to make rapid shifts in its output. Mr. Naimi, the Saudi minister, affirmed his goal of getting the commodity price of oil down to $25 a barrel, but he generated few believers that anyone in OPEC wanted lower prices.
''It remains to be seen whether the Saudis can do it,'' said Katherine Specter, an energy strategist at Deutsche Bank. ''For now, it's still mostly an empty statement.''
Even so, the psychological effect of OPEC's announcement and the prospect of higher oil prices evoked surprise and concern among several energy company representatives who came to Algiers to follow Tuesday's meeting. ''We will have to react to this right away,'' said Shigeru Kikuchi, an energy analyst at Idemitsu, a large Japanese refinery company. ''It was not something we had expected.''
OPEC would need to cut its output by only about a million barrels a day to keep prices at the higher end of its proposed trading range of $22 to $28 a barrel, said Jim Burkhard, director of oil market analysis at Cambridge Energy Research Associates.
OPEC's price, based on the average price of several types of crude produced by its members, has been above $28 since the beginning of December -- after the previous production cut of 900,000 barrels in September. The OPEC price is generally $2 to $3 a barrel below that of higher-quality West Texas intermediate crude oil traded in New York.
OPEC's price range is of keen interest to the oil markets as members continue to voice concern that the declining value of the dollar, the currency in which oil is priced, makes their trade in other currencies more expensive. In fact, OPEC seems prepared to allow oil prices to remain above $28 for some time.
''A sense of higher prices, whether stated policy or not, is what is happening in practice,'' Mr. Burkhard said.
	A big trial starts in federal court here on Monday, involving some very prominent executives who used to work for a very prominent company. Across the country, people will be following the case with great interest.
But in Houston, many residents prefer to focus on other things, like the resurgent economy, and city leaders wish outsiders would, too. The company, of course, is Enron, and the men who will be on trial are its former top executives, Kenneth L. Lay and Jeffrey K. Skilling, who face various charges in the scandal that led to the company's collapse and tarred this city's reputation four years ago.
''As of today, it's as if Enron had never happened,'' said Joan Johnson, president of the Hotel and Lodging Association of Greater Houston, echoing the sentiment of many Houstonians. Ms. Johnson said hotel occupancy was high, even though about 3,000 hotel rooms had been added downtown since Enron's collapse.
But as jury selection starts on Monday, residents here will have to relive the Enron debacle, with the possibility that the trial will drag on over several months. Already, hotels near the federal courthouse have been receiving a flow of out-of-town journalists, perhaps adding to the strength of the city's lodging industry.
In preparation for the trial, city officials are trying to accentuate the positive. The Greater Houston Partnership, a business association, raised the idea of coaching bellhops and other hotel workers on how to put Houston's best face forward in the downtown hotels, where many journalists will be staying. It rejected the proposal and instead backed a plan to post media contacts and Internet links in hotel lobbies, with the aim of planting ideas for positive stories.
Have you heard, for example, that Bakersfield, Calif., has unhealthier air quality than Houston, or that Houston has 82 foreign consulates, the nation's third-largest consular corps? The partnership puts those tidbits and more at the disposal of visiting news media.
''It was devastating for Houston to have its image portrayed as a bunch of corporate gunslingers during the first Enron go-around,'' said John F. Thrash, chief executive of eCorp, a family-owned energy concern, and the husband of Becca Cason Thrash, the hostess of Houston's most extravagant high-society gatherings. ''That is something we're striving to overcome.''
It isn't just Enron. Some residents get the jitters over even the slightest negative publicity about Houston, its wildcatting business ethic, its no-zoning sprawl or its continuing battles with industrial pollution. This week there was an outcry over an oil-laden, caramel-colored fog that blanketed a poor neighborhood in the shadow of the city's largest refinery.
Of course, Houston has taken numerous additional hits since Enron's collapse in late 2001, when the symbol of outrage became a question at a company meeting from an anonymous Enron employee to Mr. Lay, the company's embattled chairman: ''Are you on crack?''
Thousands of well-paid Enron employees lost jobs, and the city's name was associated with schemes to hide losses from investors and destabilize the flow of electricity in California.
Back then, Houston was also criticized for its freewheeling approach to business. That shows few signs of fading. While not experiencing a boom as incandescent as past expansions, Houston's economy is still growing steadily, driven by inexpensive real estate, climbing energy prices and a fast-growing population.
"We're fine now, but the impact at the time was huge," said John Flowers, who owns Kenneally's Irish Pub near the exclusive River Oaks neighborhood. He recalls the Enron executives who used to drop by his smoky establishment for pints of Guinness as "free-spending individuals who made more money than God."
The city's economy has grown for 35 consecutive months, according to a monthly survey of purchasing executives conducted by the National Association of Purchasing Management-Houston. November, the most recent month for which statistics are available, was one of the strongest months in a decade, as demand rose for goods like plastic pipes and refined petroleum products.
Houston's status as an inland transportation hub with a ship channel to the Gulf of Mexico has also provided a buffer against the demise of Enron. Aided in part by the diversion of cargo from New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, revenue at the Port of Houston increased 13 percent last year and total tonnage grew by 9 percent, said H. Thomas Kornegay, executive director of the Port of Houston Authority.
Furthermore, jobs are being created in the Houston economy. Employers added 42,500 jobs in 2005 and 24,100 in 2004, according to the Texas Workforce Commission. This follows heavy job losses in 2002 and 2003.
Much of the job creation has been fueled by a growing service industry and a robust construction market expected to expand further this year, even as housing in other parts of the country loses steam amid deflation of the real estate bubble.
''If any other city lost the seventh-largest corporation in America, it would have had more impact,'' said Tilman J. Fertitta, chief executive of Landry's Restaurants, and one of a handful of Houston businessmen who have filled the void left by Mr. Lay's exit from the city's social scene.
''It's just a whole hell of a lot cheaper here than other cities,'' Mr. Fertitta, one of the largest holders of real estate in Houston and nearby Galveston, said in an interview. ''This is still an energy town but our prices have allowed us to become more diverse than in the 80's.''
Relatively low home prices, with three-bedroom homes still widely available for less than $200,000, are luring developers to erect entirely new cities on the prairies and rice fields that make up much of Houston's outer fringe. Cheap land pushed housing starts to a record high in 2005, when they climbed 18 percent, to 48,000, according to Metrostudy, a real estate consulting firm.
One new real estate venture, a planned community called Bridgeland that is being developed by General Growth Properties of Chicago, is projected to consist of 21,000 new homes over 10,000 acres, an area larger than Houston's entire existing inner core of skyscrapers, subdivisions and shopping districts.
This project and others are a bet that Houston's population will continue to climb. The Houston-Galveston Area Council, which represents the eight-county Houston area, forecasts an increase to 8.8 million residents by 2035, from 5.3 million today. Much of the growth is driven by immigrants from Latin America, Africa and Asia, who come here legally or illegally and stay for the same reason that 150,000 survivors of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita relocated to Houston last year: a warm welcome.
In contrast to other communities that have experienced successful movements against illegal immigrants, calls by anti-immigrant groups last year to start questioning residents about their citizenship status drew a chilly response from Mayor Bill White and police officials, who perceived such a measure as a diversion from preventing crime.
And in a decision that raised eyebrows throughout Texas, The Dallas Morning News on Jan. 1 named Houston its ''2005 Texan of the Year.'' The city beat out the filmmaker Robert Rodriguez, the cyclist Lance Armstrong and Ronnie Earle, the prosecutor who helped engineer the indictment of Representative Tom DeLay, the Republican who represents Houston's southern suburbs.
In an editorial that seemed a veiled criticism of political divisiveness in its hometown, The Morning News cited Houston's ''resilience, resourcefulness and good old Texas neighborliness on a scale that did the whole state proud.''
''The mountain came to Mohammed when Dallas tipped its hat at us that way,'' said Richard W. Murray, an influential pollster and political scientist at the University of Houston. ''We've come a long way since the boom 25 years ago, when people were raising cash with projections of $100 oil. No one's doing that now.''
Instead, Mr. Murray pointed out, there is a new sobriety and even, perhaps, the beginning of a sense that the benefits from the city's modest economic expansion need to spread out more equitably. For instance, the Service Employees International Union last month unionized 4,700 janitors in Houston, in one of the most successful unionization drives in the South in recent decades.
Not surprisingly, the most vibrant area of Houston's economy these days is energy, which is starting to hire after years of job cuts; oil and gas companies account for roughly 50 percent of economic activity here, down from higher levels as other industry grows more prominent.
So it may be fitting, as Houston tries to put to rest its association with Enron's hard-charging chiefs, that the last of the city's larger-than-life wildcatters are fading away or facing their own legal problems. Red Adair, the oil well firefighter, and Michel T. Halbouty, the geologist who cut his teeth in the east Texas oil fields, both died recently. And federal agents arrested the oilman Oscar S. Wyatt, 81, at his home several weeks ago on charges of paying millions of dollars in kickbacks to Saddam Hussein's regime.
	President Hugo Chávez's decision not to renew the broadcast license of RCTV, one of this country's oldest television stations and a frequent critic of his government, has fueled a fierce debate over whether he is stifling dissent in Venezuela as he strengthens his control of the broadcasting industry.
Senior officials in Mr. Chávez's government moved quickly to react to growing international and domestic criticism of the decision. Reporters Without Borders, the Paris-based press freedom group, said the move, which Mr. Chávez announced in a speech before military officers last week, was a ''serious attack on editorial pluralism.'' The group asked Mr. Chávez's government ''to reconsider its stance and guarantee an independent system of concessions and renewals of licenses.''
Vice President José Vicente Rangel said the decision was not political retaliation but a ''right of the state for reasons that are justified.'' Others officials, however, made it clear that the decision was a reaction to RCTV's editorial policies, particularly in relation to a coup in April 2002 that briefly removed Mr. Chávez as president.
''RCTV's determining role during the events of the 2002 coup must be remembered,'' Willian Lara, the communications minister, said at a news conference on Friday. ''That irresponsible attitude hasn't changed at RCTV.''
The actions of RCTV and other private broadcasters during the chaotic days of the coup are at the heart of their tension with Mr. Chávez's government. Several of the broadcasters appeared to support the coup, substituting coverage of the coup's collapse and Mr. Chávez's return to power with reruns of American movies and Walt Disney cartoons.
Since then, Mr. Chávez has accused the broadcasters of waging a ''psychological war'' against his administration, describing the country's main channels, Globovisión, Televen, Venevisión and RCTV, as ''horsemen of the apocalypse.'' His re-election this month to a six-year term has not tempered his disdain for the traditional news media elite and for RCTV in particular.
''This decision can only be seen as a control strategy and an abuse of power,'' said Ewald Scharfenberg, executive director of the Institute for Press and Society, a group here that examines press freedom issues.
Through elections and personnel changes over the past eight years, Mr. Chávez and his supporters have consolidated power across Venezuela's political institutions, controlling Congress, the Supreme Court and every state government but two. The privately controlled media are one of the areas of society, along with private enterprise, religious institutions and professional sports, outside of Mr. Chávez's control.
Teodoro Petkoff, editor of the opposition-aligned newspaper Tal Cual, described Venezuela's political system as an ''autocracy'' advancing toward ''light totalitarianism,'' in comments this month that inflamed Mr. Chávez's government.
With their vociferous criticism of Mr. Chávez and his policies, private newspapers, television stations and radio broadcasters, along with a small community of Internet bloggers, offer daily evidence that freedom of expression still exists here.
Still, pro-Chávez legislation has enhanced the government's ability to clamp down on critics through legal action or threats of prosecution, creating a ''climate of self-censorship,'' according to Human Rights Watch. A 2004 law subjects television and radio stations to heavy fines or suspension of their licenses for broadcasts deemed to ''condone or incite'' public disturbances.
Similarly, legislators amended the criminal code last year to increase penalties for criminal defamation and libel. Napoleón Bravo, a well-known television journalist, was charged under those new provisions this year for denigrating the Supreme Court by claiming that it was inefficient and suggesting that it be replaced with a brothel.
Since the coup in 2002, two private stations, RCTV and Globovisión, have remained critical of Mr. Chávez while two others, Venevisión and Televen, have become decidedly less so. RCTV's contentious relationship with Mr. Chávez worsened during the coup, when Andrés Izarra, the news operations manager for RCTV, resigned after he said his superiors suppressed coverage of developments about the coup.
Mr. Izarra went on to become Mr. Chávez's communications minister and is now head of Telesur, a pan-Latin American news station that is one of numerous media ventures supported by Venezuela's government in recent years. Federal and regional governments now control five television stations, including one used to broadcast all of Mr. Chávez's domestic speeches and an influential talk show that pillories his critics.
The government also controls eight radio broadcasters and a news agency, and is building a communications satellite with assistance from China that is scheduled to be launched into orbit by 2008. Mr. Lara, the communications minister, said one option for RCTV once its license expires in 2007 would be for Venezuela de Televisión, the government's main broadcaster, to take control of its operations.
Some of Mr. Chávez's dislike for RCTV appears to stem in part from how Marcel Granier, the broadcaster's chief executive, has publicly referred to him as a ''lieutenant colonel.'' The term refers to the rank Mr. Chávez achieved in Venezuela's army, but is also an attempt to mock him as militaristic.
In his speech announcing his decision to not renew RCTV's license, Mr. Chávez, dressed in a military uniform and red beret, appeared to jab at the reference. ''When they try to say that someone is a gorilla, an ignoramus,'' Mr. Chávez said, ''they say he is a lieutenant colonel.''
The tension created by the RCTV decision left some wondering how Mr. Chávez will treat other critics as he starts a new term. ''It leaves a very bad taste that we end the year with this anxiety,'' Archbishop Roberto Luckert of Coro said in comments on private radio. ''This is a trampling of freedom of expression.''
	Near this small Mennonite town carved out of the thick jungle, a farmer dug a shallow water well a few years ago and found a viscous black liquid seeping into the water. Given Belize's disappointing record of oil exploration, stretching back to its years under British rule, nearly everyone shrugged at the story except a stubborn Denver geologist.
Now Belize is the newest exporter of oil to the United States, a development that is starting to upend this small country of 280,000 people. A roughneck crew, backed by investors from Ireland and Colorado, struck oil in its first drilling attempt last year.
Their wells, dotting the dairy farms of German-speaking Mennonites who moved here a half-century ago from Canada and Mexico, are producing 2,000 barrels a day of oil similar in quality to the prized low-sulfur crude from the oil fields of West Texas.
''We need some help from fuel prices in this country, but people aren't too happy living near a smelly well,'' Jake Letkeman, the operator of the small Mennonite-controlled electricity plant here, said. ''We're waiting to see how this thing plays out.'' Much of Belize is on tenterhooks regarding the oil and its ramifications, but the small companies behind the discovery, Belize Natural Energy and CHX Energy of Denver, are reveling in their good fortune. Together with other independent companies that have recently struck oil and natural gas in locations once written off, including Paraguay, Syria and Uganda, these entrepreneurs are proving that wildcatting is alive and well.
As in Belize, the quantities of oil discovered in these places are relatively small, which partly explains why the largest and richest oil companies, Exxon Mobil, Chevron and Royal Dutch Shell, shun such gambles for larger so-called elephant projects with more promising returns.
But with oil fetching more than $60 a barrel on world markets, smaller companies are willing to risk just about everything these days in hopes of finding even tiny oil fields.
[Oil prices rose to $61.46 Monday in reaction to rebel attacks in Nigeria.]
''There were 50 dry wells drilled in Belize over 50 years until we came along,'' said Susan Morrice, a geologist from Denver. She is the wildcatter behind Belize Natural Energy, a venture she formed with the backing of her husband, the Colorado oil executive Alex Cranberg, and more than 70 small investors from her native Ireland. ''We simply felt we could not fail in our search for oil in such a promising, if neglected, country.''
Ms. Morrice's company has been remarkably swift in turning the discovery into cash. In January, Belize Natural Energy loaded 40,000 barrels onto a barge destined for a refinery in Houston, netting the company about $2 million.
With other wells planned in Spanish Lookout, it soon expects to be producing 5,000 barrels a day, and some geologists say Belize as a whole may one day produce 50,000 barrels a day.
That is a drop in the bucket compared with neighboring Mexico, where daily output is 3.4 million barrels a day. But it is significant for a small country on the margins of the global economy that has long scrounged for enough hard currency to import all its oil.
Belize imports about 5,000 barrels of oil a day, and gasoline costs nearly $5 a gallon. So the crude in Spanish Lookout has allowed this country to dream of energy independence.
Still, Belize, known as British Honduras until it was granted autonomy from Britain in 1981, faces some serious obstacles before it becomes anything resembling the Kuwait of Central America. About the same size as nearby El Salvador, it has only 4 percent of that country's population. It also has no refineries or pipelines and, unlike many developing countries, it has no national oil company or even an oil ministry.
But Belize does have a hidden asset in a civil servant, André Cho, who spends his time in a modest bungalow with linoleum floors and a screen door, in the capital city of Belmopan.
''I've been under a lot of stress lately, man,'' said Mr. Cho, 29, Belize's inspector of petroleum. The phone in Mr. Cho's office, which holds stacks of dog-eared copies of Oil & Gas Journal and British-era geological maps, has been ringing repeatedly in recent weeks with inquiries about drilling licenses from small American and European oil companies.
''We don't want to repeat the mistakes of other oil countries, like Nigeria,'' said Mr. Cho, wearing jeans and a gold earring. He said the government had recently approved his request to hire more staff geologists, as well as a former United Nations consultant from India who specializes in organizing the petroleum industries of poor nations.
Despite such moves and the formation in December of a government petroleum advisory board, there is considerable skepticism throughout Belize that the country can develop its oil resources without the corruption and environmental damage that afflict other poor oil-producing countries.
''If oil wealth brings millions, even billions, to Belize, who is to say that the wealth will not vanish just the same?'' Amandala, the country's largest-circulation newspaper, said in a recent editorial, citing a string of recent corruption scandals. In one report, government pension funds were said to have been used to pay the foreign obligations of a telecommunications start-up. ''Belizeans,'' the editorial said, ''need to keep their eyes on the oil and the money.''
Much of the tension around the oil discovery is focused on the 7.5 percent royalty that Belize Natural Energy is required to pay the government, which is much less than in other oil-producing countries. (Royalties to Norway for exploration in the North Sea, for instance, are more than 70 percent.)
Prime Minister Said W. Musa has said the royalty was kept low to provide a strong incentive for companies to explore in a country where oil had never been found before.
Sheila McCaffrey, a director in Belmopan of Belize Natural Energy, said the government would end up collecting overall taxes of about 30 percent on the oil. That includes the royalty and agreements that give the government a minority stake in the company, along with control of 10 percent of production from the oil wells.
The company is also trying to avoid ill will among Belizeans by channeling 1 percent of its revenue to a fund for protecting the country's fragile environment, which is about 40 percent jungle.
In Spanish Lookout, no one is waiting to find ways of profiting from the oil. The 1,400 Mennonites in the town still want a small share of the government's royalties to be transferred to them, but many are already using some of the low-sulfur oil by mixing it directly with diesel fuel in their small electricity plant, tractors and pickup trucks.
George Remple, the owner of Farmer's Choice Gas, said he had a steady stream of customers dropping in to buy the fuel, which he acquired from Belize Natural Energy for $1.60 a gallon and sold to customers for $1.80. ''As long as the engine isn't too computerized,'' he said, ''it runs fine.''
Oil here is low in impurities, or ''sweet'' in the parlance of the oil industry, making it relatively easy to process into fuel. So Belize Natural Energy, according to Ms. McCaffrey, plans to import a small plant that would enable it to produce diesel fuel from crude locally, which would alleviate the country's need to import some of its refined fuel.
On the drawing board as well, she said, was a project to use natural gas from the oil wells to fuel electricity plants, which might allow Belize to avoid costly and environmentally controversial hydroelectric dams. Other projects include a pipeline and an export terminal on thecoast.
These ambitious plans, though, hinge on a smooth political environment in Belize. The United States is transferring its embassy from hurricane-battered Belize City to Belmopan, the centrally planned capital in the interior, laid out by the British in the 1970's, that resembles a small Brasília. The American embassy complex, under construction, would dwarf the capital's other structures, including federal buildings designed along Mayan temple motifs.
The most acute political risk for Belize's nascent oil industry may be a long-festering territorial dispute with neighboring Guatemala, the most densely populated country in Central America and home to 12 million people. Guatemala waited until 1992 to recognize Belize's independence officially.
Generations of Guatemalans have been taught in school that ''Belice es nuestro,'' or ''Belize is ours,'' a slogan that might acquire new resonance if abundant oil is found in Belize.
Representatives of the two countries agreed this month to begin negotiations to resolve territorial claims, but areas of Belize where oil exploration is taking place or planned remain squarely in land still claimed by Guatemala. Spanish Lookout is just a 20-minute drive from the Guatemalan border, where migrants seeking available land, many of them Maya Indians, have settled.
Irma Uck, a shopkeeper at the border crossing of Benque Viejo del Carmen, and who said her father was Guatemalan, said the oil discovery would add to tension in the area.
''Guatemala has a little oil, but they want more,'' Ms. Uck, 52, said. ''Everyone here has heard that Belize now has oil.''
	An explosion that flattened a large part of the Algerian port of Skikda last month, killing 30 people and injuring 70 more, has shaken plans to build dozens of liquefied natural gas terminals in the United States to address a forecast shortage of natural gas.
Environmentalists in California, Massachusetts and Alabama have challenged the safety of the proposed L.N.G. terminals, where supercooled natural gas is to be taken from oceangoing tankers, warmed and then pumped into the pipeline network. The Algerian disaster is bolstering arguments against L.N.G. terminals that were already under scrutiny by regulators; about 30 terminals have been proposed for the United States.
The Jan. 19 blast at Skikda -- a port responsible for about a quarter of the L.N.G. exports from Algeria, the world's second-largest L.N.G. exporter after Indonesia -- was the deadliest incident in more than 30 years for the industry.
Sonatrach, Algeria's national oil and gas company, has attributed the explosion to an accident at a steam boiler, and the administration of President Abdelaziz Bouteflika has promised an official inquiry. In the meantime, costs related to the explosion have continued to climb.
Abdellatif Benachenhou, Algeria's finance minister, said in an interview on Tuesday that the nation could lose as much as $300 million in export revenue this year if Skikda remained shut for an extended period. That would be in addition to the $800 million to $1 billion needed to rebuild the port, which was constructed in the early 1970's by Technip, a French construction company, and renovated in the late 1990's by the Halliburton Company, the large Texas energy services concern.
''Of course it will have an impact,'' Mr. Benachenhou said, referring to the Skikda accident. ''We're still trying to figure it out.''
Until last month's explosion, Algeria, which was a pioneer in the L.N.G. industry when its first exporting plants were built 40 years ago, had not suffered a fatal accident at the plants, even during a decade-long civil conflict between the military-backed government and opposition groups that has claimed the lives of about 120,000 people.
The blast came just weeks before the gathering here this week of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, the first time the group has met in Algeria since 1980.
While the Skikda explosion has jolted Algeria's energy industry, it has also raised doubts over the safety of dozens of proposed L.N.G. projects in the United States, where a shortage of natural gas and a projected surge in demand has spurred the ambitions of energy companies. Environmental advocates and other opponents of the terminals -- which would be built in San Francisco, San Diego and Mobile, Ala., among other places -- have seized upon the Skikda blast as an argument for greater scrutiny of those projects.
Even though the Skikda plant is not identical to the terminals being proposed in the United States and the explosion there has not been tied directly to L.N.G., they say the destructive power of that accident should give planners pause when reviewing requests to build in the United States.
''The lesson to take away from Algeria is that it was an event of greater magnitude than anyone expected,'' said Bill Powers, chairman of the Border Power Plant Working Group, an organization in San Diego that has protested plans to build L.N.G. plants nearby in northern Mexico. ''That's why we should not put L.N.G. facilities anywhere near centers of population.''
Opposition was already particularly strong in California. Royal Dutch/Shell and Bechtel shelved plans to build a large regasification plant in Vallejo, Calif., near San Francisco, after residents lobbied against the project. Community opposition to a proposed terminal in Long Beach, Calif., has also been fierce.
Opposition to L.N.G. projects has also strengthened in other states. In Alabama, for instance, Exxon Mobil signaled in late January, after the Skikda explosion, that it would shift its focus to gaining regulatory approval for L.N.G. terminals at two locations in Texas instead of in Mobile Bay in Alabama.
Bob Davis, a spokesman for Exxon Mobil, said the company's decision was not related directly to the Skikda explosion but to persistent opposition to the project from community and government officials in Alabama. Mr. Davis acknowledged, however, that Skikda was increasingly being used as a rallying cry by opponents to L.N.G. installations.
''You've got to be careful about making one-to-one comparisons with the facilities we're considering for the U.S.,'' he said.
Energy industry executives and regulatory officials have pointed out that the explosion in Skikda has been preliminarily attributed to a boiler that is not expected to be part of L.N.G. terminals in the United States, which are to be used for warming liquefied gas back into a vapor, then storing it. The Skikda plant did the opposite, chilling natural gas until it condensed into a liquid, which is easier to transport by ship.
''It's not bad to scrutinize the incident so we can come away with a proper assessment of the risks involved,'' said Michelle Michot Foss, director of the Institute for Energy, Law and Enterprise at the University of Houston. ''Accidents involving L.N.G. have still been relatively rare events.''
There have been only a handful of deadly L.N.G.-related accidents since the first plants to liquefy natural gas were built in the early 20th century, according to Ms. Foss's institute. The worst occurred in Cleveland in 1944, when a gas leak and subsequent blast killed 128 people.
The industry's relatively safe record in the three decades before the Skikda explosion was not enough to convince some environmental advocates that L.N.G. terminals were relatively safe. Stephanie Gomes, an anti-L.N.G. activist in Vallejo, Calif., said the Algeria incident showed the need to put gas-receiving terminals offshore, away from population centers.
''The properties of L.N.G. are dangerous and unknown,'' Ms. Gomes said. ''You just don't put this kind of thing near people.''
Besides fanning debate over L.N.G. terminals in the United States, the Skikda accident has hampered Algeria's ability to deliver natural gas that it has already sold to energy companies in Spain, France and Italy. Sonatrach has pledged to honor its contracts to those companies by shipping gas through pipelines or by purchasing L.N.G. on the international market.
Sonatrach is eager not to lose business to competing L.N.G. projects in Egypt and Nigeria, said Isaac Xenitides, an energy analyst for Fitch Ratings in London. Egypt, which is also close to traditionally large markets for Algerian gas, like Spain, has two L.N.G. exporting plants under construction.
''Someone who might have a contract might be thinking, 'Let's diversify,''' Mr. Xenitides said. ''It's not life-threatening for Sonatrach but this incident will have repercussions for Algeria.''
If Algeria is able to quickly rebuild and expand its gas exporting capability, it could limit the financial impact of the Skikda blast, although oil and gas exports account for more than 95 percent of export earnings and about 60 percent of budget revenue.
L.N.G. is estimated to generate about 15 percent of the nation's hydrocarbon export revenue, and that amount is believed to be rising. Skikda accounted for about a quarter of Algeria's L.N.G. exports, according to Poten & Partners, an energy brokerage and consulting firm in New York.
	President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran arrived here on Saturday for talks with President Hugo Chávez, on the first leg of a Latin American visit to enhance Tehran's stature with governments where distrust of the Bush administration already runs deep.
It is Mr. Ahmadinejad's second visit to Venezuela in the past five months, and the two leaders were scheduled to talk about strengthening their economic ties. From here, the Iranian president is to visit Ecuador and Nicaragua, where leftist presidents aligned with Mr. Chavez are taking office this month.
Venezuela's government promoted the visit as an example of Middle Eastern solidarity with Mr. Chávez's opposition to American foreign policy. Venezuela has been a vociferous defender of Iran as the United States steps up efforts to circumscribe Mr. Ahmadinejad's government, most recently through military raids this week on people suspected of being Iranian operatives in Iraq.
State television here showed images of Mr. Chávez embracing Mr. Ahmadinejad and of Iranian cars rolling off an assembly line at a recently inaugurated factory in the city of Maracay. Fifty cadets from Venezuela's naval academy were on hand to receive the Iranian president at the international airport in Maiquetía.
''Welcome, fighter for just causes,'' Mr. Chávez said in a speech here before the National Assembly, describing Mr. Ahmadinejad as a ''revolutionary'' and a ''brother.''
The two countries said Saturday night that they would use a $2 billion investment fund to finance projects in Venezuela and Iran, as well as in other countries. In addition, they said they were considering ventures to train teachers and produce manioc starch in Venezuela. Mr. Chávez also said Venezuela and Iran would press for exporting cuts within OPEC in an effort to push oil prices up from a 19-month low.
Nowhere has Iran's search for allies in Latin America been more fruitful than in Venezuela. The two countries have signed an array of agreements in recent months, pledging to work together here in exploring for oil, building low-income housing and assembling tractors and bicycles, among other ventures.
The tightening alliance with Iran comes as Mr. Chávez pushes for broad changes in Venezuela's political and economic structures. Just this week, Mr. Chávez's government said it would nationalize the entire electricity industry and the country's largest phone company.
Mr. Chávez also announced a plan which, according to some interpretations, would reconfigure municipal governments by replacing them with entities called communal councils. The president's supporters in Congress say the project is inspired by the Paris Commune, the socialist government that briefly ruled Paris in 1871. Critics of the plan, which also includes the construction of entirely new cities in Venezuela's interior, say it would effectively eliminate some of the few elected politicians who remain opposed to the government.
Mr. Ahmadinejad's visit has alarmed Jewish organizations here and elsewhere because of his aggressive talk in relation to Israel. Heinz Sonntag, a prominent Venezuelan sociologist and political commentator, said the visit by Mr. Ahmadinejad was an ''affront and an eventual threat to our fellow countrymen who are Jewish.''
''The invitation of this personality is the finishing touch on Chávez's announcements this week,'' said Mr. Sonntag.
Venezuela has a long history of close relations with Middle Eastern countries, dating to the founding of OPEC in Baghdad in 1960 by Venezuela, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, in an effort to keep oil prices high. Mr. Chávez has strengthened those ties through overtures to Iran, and more recently Syria, where Venezuela and Iran have plans to build an oil refinery capable of processing 150,000 barrels a day.
''There is a desire by Chávez to accelerate what he views as a strategic alliance with Iran,'' said Alberto Garrido, author of ''Chávez's Wars,'' a book recently published here that explores Venezuela's ties to the Middle East. ''The Venezuelan left has for decades considered alliances with Muslim countries as one of the ways to create a new civilization through the toppling of American values.''
For the time being, Venezuela's relations with Iran have revolved around Mr. Chávez's defense of Iran's uranium enrichment plans, while the two countries deepen their cooperation in oil-related areas. For instance, Venezuela said last month that it would buy four oil tankers from Iran, part of Venezuela's plan to increase its 21-ship tanker fleet through the acquisition of 42 additional vessels.
Iran and Venezuela, the world's fourth- and fifth-largest oil exporters, are also exploring for oil together in Venezuela's Orinoco region. And they have plans for a joint oil trading company, part of an ambition by Caracas and Tehran to price oil in euros instead of dollars in order to weaken the influence of the United States in the international oil market.
Iran seems to have also found a welcome in Ecuador, an oil-exporting country where Mr. Ahmadinejad will attend the inauguration of Rafael Correa, a leftist economist elected president last year. And in Nicaragua, Mr. Ahmadinejad will meet with Daniel Ortega, the former guerrilla leader who assumed the presidency this month.
	