I've heard the concern expressed dozens of times by New Orleans residents who are poor and black and still living in enforced exile from their wounded city: Maybe they don't want us back.
You hear it again and again and again, the tone of voice varying from sadness to anger to resignation, but always laced with the unmistakable pain of feeling unwelcome in one's own home. I've come to think of it as the New Orleans lament.
''They are not trying to bring us home,'' said Geraldine Craig, who is living in a federally sponsored trailer encampment in Baton Rouge. ''Just the opposite. They're telling us to find housing here.''
''It hurts,'' said Mimi Adams, a woman who wore out her welcome with relatives in Houston and Atlanta but has no idea when she might return to New Orleans. ''Even if I could find a place, the rents are too high,'' she said. ''They've gone up a lot. I'm told they don't want us poor folks back, that they're making it a city for the well-to-do. That's what I'm hearing.''
Sixteen months have passed since the apocalyptic flood that followed Hurricane Katrina. More than 13,000 residents who were displaced by the storm are still living in trailers provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Another 100,000 to 200,000 evacuees -- most of whom want to return home -- are scattered throughout the United States.
The undeniable neglect of this population fuels the suspicion among the poor and the black, who constitute a majority of the evacuees, that the city is being handed over to the well-to-do and the white.
If you talk to public officials, you will hear about billions of dollars in aid being funneled through this program or that. The maze of bureaucratic initiatives is dizzying. But when you talk to the people most in need of help -- the poor, the elderly, the disabled, the children -- you will find in most cases that the help is not reaching them. There is no massive effort, no master plan, to bring back the people who were driven from the city and left destitute by Katrina.
Only the federal government could finance such an effort. Neither the city of New Orleans nor the state of Louisiana has anywhere near the kind of money that would be required. ''You've got a lot of people who don't have a place to stay,'' Gov. Kathleen Blanco told me in an interview on Friday, ''and they're spread all over creation.''
The federal government has not come close to meeting the challenge of this overwhelming humanitarian crisis. Instead of a concerted, creative effort to develop housing and organize the return to New Orleans of the poor and working-class families who were the heart and soul of the city, the government focused to a large extent on rolling out travel trailers to temporarily house an embarrassingly small percentage of the people in need.
''FEMA spent a lot on trailers,'' said Governor Blanco, ''trailers that are falling apart right now. And they spent as much money on those trailers in many cases as you would on putting a new house in place.''
The simple fact is that no one at any level of government, city, state or federal, has shown the leadership that was needed in response to this astounding tragedy. I tried to talk about this last week with the mayor of New Orleans, C. Ray Nagin, but he and his chief press aide were on vacation.
The most candid official I spoke with was Raymond Jetson, the chief executive of the Louisiana Family Recovery Corps, an independent, nonprofit group set up by the state in the wake of the storm.
''The most daunting aspect of the recovery is the human recovery,'' he said, ''and at this point it has certainly not received the resources or the attention that it needs.''
What was readily apparent in the aftermath of the botched rescue was the damage to the levees, the ruined homes and the city's devastated infrastructure. ''I don't think,'' said Mr. Jetson, ''that the reality of what was happening in the lives of people and families was as apparent.''
The situation remains desperate for thousands of displaced residents. ''Working families are finding it difficult to re-establish their households,'' Mr. Jetson said. ''People who are out of state want to come back home. The clock is ticking on the people who are living in the FEMA trailer communities. You have some people who are totally isolated from resources. And the emotional well-being of a significant number of people and families is literally in peril.''
This is how the new year is starting out for the victims of the great flood of 2005.
Op-Ed Columnist
	On the evening of the fourth of April, 1967, one year to the day (almost to the hour) before his assassination, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. walked into Riverside Church in Manhattan and delivered a speech that was among his least well known, yet most controversial.
''I come to this magnificent house of worship tonight,'' he said, ''because my conscience leaves me no other choice.''
The speech was an eloquent, full-throated denunciation of the war in Vietnam, one of the earliest public critiques by such a high-profile American. Silence in the face of the horrors of that war, said Dr. King, amounted to a ''betrayal.''
The speech unleashed a hurricane of criticism. Even the N.A.A.C.P. complained about Dr. King stepping out of his perceived area of expertise, civil rights, to raise his voice against the evil of the war. The Times headlined an editorial, ''Dr. King's Error.''
The war would go on for another eight years, ultimately taking the lives of 58,000 Americans and a million to two million Vietnamese. Dr. King himself would be silenced, at the age of 39, by a bullet in Memphis.
The widespread celebration of Dr. King's birthday on Monday brought that Vietnam speech to mind. It's both gratifying and important that we honor this great man with a national holiday. But it's disturbing that we pay so much more attention to the celebrations than we do to the absolutely crucial lessons that he spent much of his life trying to teach us.
Whether it's the war in Iraq, or the plight of New Orleans in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, or the violence and self-destructive behavior that plagues so many black Americans, our attitude toward the wisdom of Dr. King has been that of the drug addict or alcoholic to the notion that there might be a better way. We give lip service to it, and then we ignore it.
In the Vietnam speech, Dr. King said, ''A nation that continues year after year to spend more money on military defense than on programs of social uplift is approaching spiritual death.'' He may as well have been speaking into the void. The war in Iraq, a reprise of Vietnam, will cost us well over a trillion dollars before we're done, and probably more than two trillion. More than 3,000 American G.I.'s have been killed and the death toll for Iraqis is tallied by the scores of thousands.
No one knows what to do, although the politicians and the pundits are all over television, day and night, background singers to the carnage.
Here at home the city of New Orleans is on life support, struggling to survive the combined effects of a catastrophic flood, the unconscionable neglect of the federal government, and the monumental ineptitude of its own local officials. As ordinary residents of New Orleans continue to suffer, the rest of the nation has casually turned away. The debacle is no longer being televised. So it must be over.
Dr. King held the unfashionable view that we had an obligation to help those who are in trouble, and to speak out against unfair treatment and social injustice. ''Our lives begin to end,'' he said, ''the day we become silent about things that matter.''
New Orleans matters. And the long dark night of the war in Iraq must surely matter. But not enough voices of protest are being raised in either case. The anger quotient is much too low. You can't stop America's involvement in a senseless war or revive a dying American city if your greatest passion is kicking back with pizza and beer and tuning in to ''American Idol.''
The quality of life for black Americans more than 38 years after the death of Dr. King is a mixed bag. Blacks are far better off economically and educationally than ever before. Barack Obama is a leading candidate for the Democratic nomination for president, and the last two secretaries of state have been black.
But the ominous shadow of racial prejudice is still with us. Even President Bush acknowledged that conditions in New Orleans pre-Katrina were proof of that. The nation's prisons are filled to the bursting point with black men who have failed, or been failed, and have no viable future. And too many black Americans are willing and even eager to see themselves in the culturally depraved lineup of gangsters, pimps and whores.
Dr. King would be 78 now, and I can't believe that he would be too thrilled by what's going on. In his view: ''He who passively accepts evil is as much involved in it as he who helps to perpetrate it. He who accepts evil without protesting against it is really cooperating with it.''
We miss his leadership, all of us, whether we're wise enough to realize it or not.
Op-Ed Columnist
	It was a few minutes after 11 a.m. when the scattered crowd began moving slowly toward the stage at the end of the Mall. The sky was a beautiful sunlit blue and the Capitol building, huge and white and majestic, offered the protesters an emotional backdrop that seemed almost close enough to touch.
''It's so big,'' said a woman from Milwaukee, who was there with her husband and two children. ''It's lovely. Makes you want to cry.''
You can say what you want about the people opposed to this wretched war in Iraq, try to stereotype them any way you can. But you couldn't walk among them for more than a few minutes on Saturday without realizing that they love their country as much as anyone ever has. They love it enough to try to save it.
By 11:15 I thought there was a chance that the march against the war would be a bust. There just weren't that many people moving toward the stage to join the rally that preceded the march. But the crowd kept building, slowly, steadily. It was a good-natured crowd. Everyone was bad-mouthing the Bush administration and the war, but everybody seemed to be smiling.
There were gray-haired women with digital cameras and young girls with braces. There were guys trying to look cool in knit caps and shades and balding baby boomers trading stories about Vietnam. And many ordinary families.
''Where's Hillary?'' someone asked.
That evoked laughter in the crowd. ''She's in Iowa running for president,'' someone said.
When a woman asked, ''What's her position on the war?'' a man standing next to her cracked, ''She was for it before she was against it.''
More laughter.
The crowd kept building. There were people being pushed in wheelchairs and babies in strollers. There were elderly men and women, walking very slowly in some cases and holding hands.
The goal of the crowd was to get the attention of Congress and persuade it to move vigorously to reverse the Bush war policies. But the thought that kept returning as I watched the earnestly smiling faces, so many of them no longer young, was the way these protesters had somehow managed to keep the faith. They still believed, after all the years and all the lies, that they could make a difference. They still believed their government would listen to them and respond.
''I have to believe in this,'' said Donna Norton of Petaluma, Calif. ''I have a daughter in the reserves and a son-in-law on active duty. I feel very, very strongly about this.''
Betty and Peter Vinten-Johansen of East Lansing, Mich., said they felt obliged to march, believing that they could bolster the resolve of opponents of the war in Congress. Glancing toward the Capitol, Mr. Vinten-Johansen said, ''Maybe we can strengthen their backbone a little bit.''
Even the celebrities who have been at this sort of thing for decades have managed to escape the debilitating embrace of cynicism. ''How can you be cynical?'' asked Tim Robbins, just before he mounted the stage to address the crowd, which by that time had grown to more than 100,000.
''This is inspiring,'' he said. ''It's the real voice of the American people, and when you hear that collective voice protesting freely it reminds you of the greatness of our country. It gives you hope.''
When Jane Fonda said, ''Silence is no longer an option,'' she was doing more than expressing the outrage of the crowd over the carnage in Iraq and the president's decision to escalate American involvement. She was implicitly re-asserting her belief in the effectiveness of citizen action.
Ms. Fonda is approaching 70 now and was at the march with her two grandchildren. It was very touching to watch her explain how she had declined to participate in antiwar marches for 34 years because she was afraid her notoriety would harm rather than help the effort.
The public is way out in front of the politicians on this issue. But the importance of Saturday's march does not lie primarily in whether it hastens a turnaround of U.S. policy on the war. The fact that so many Americans were willing to travel from every region of the country to march against the war was a reaffirmation of the public's commitment to our peaceful democratic processes.
It is in that unique and unflagging commitment, not in our terrifying military power, that the continued promise and greatness of America are to be found.
Op-Ed Columnist
	