On many Venetian evenings, Baroque music can be heard echoing from concerts in the city's myriad churches. In the 1750's, that same music also filled the air. Or so it would appear from Lasse Hallstrom's new romantic comedy, ''Casanova,'' in which the infamous rake goes about his mischief accompanied by Vivaldi, Albinoni, Corelli and the like.
Indeed, it might even be said that, along with Venice itself, Baroque music plays the libertine's accomplice here. And since ''Casanova'' is a period farce, it also seems logical for the score to embrace the humor and rhythms of opera buffa, as the 18th-century Italian comic opera was known.
And yet Baroque music lovers may well be puzzled.
They may recognize familiar passages, because almost all the music in ''Casanova'' has been taken from concertos, overtures and dances written by a dozen or so 18th-century composers. Yet, because the excerpts have been stitched together in an original -- and thoroughly cinematic -- way, they are actually hearing a ''new'' Baroque work.
The movie, which opened Dec. 25 to warm reviews, stars Heath Ledger as Casanova and Sienna Miller as Francesca Bruni, the woman he finally loves forever. (This is fiction.) Also on board are Jeremy Irons, Lena Olin, Oliver Platt and Omid Djalili. And then, moving the plot along at a 007 pace, through duels, trials and chases, is the score.
''It was just an obvious first idea to go with period music,'' Mr. Hallstrom said in a telephone interview from his home in Westchester County, N.Y. ''It's not the kind of story that needs the support of a modern score. It can take a light score, which can be elegant when it needs to be elegant. The editor and I were convinced we could do it with the old masters.''
Executives at Touchstone Pictures, the division of the Walt Disney Company that released the movie, were initially less sure. ''This was an unusual approach for a Hollywood movie,'' Andrew Mondshein, the film's editor, said by telephone from his home in Larchmont, N.Y., ''and the studio was concerned that we wouldn't be able to do an entire score with original material.''
Well, it was possible, and a CD soundtrack has been released to prove it. But the journey from idea to this reconstructed 18th-century score was anything but simple.
It helped that Mr. Hallstrom's upbringing in Sweden was steeped in music: he attended a school that specialized in music and music history, and he played the piano, sang in choirs and composed music. Years later, he made pop videos for Swedish television, while one of his first Swedish-language feature films, ''Happy We,'' was set in the world of opera.
For ''Casanova,'' though, he did not want a score that illustrated the action. ''I am suspicious of scores which support along the lines of what you're already seeing on the screen,'' he said. ''The American tendency is to underscore what it already up there. I wanted to add an irony or color or shading which doesn't go right along with the visuals.''
Still, shooting began in Venice last year without a decision on the score. Leslie Holleran, Mr. Hallstrom's longtime producer, who is married to Mr. Mondshein, said she had even discussed an original score with a ''very famous and expensive'' composer. But, she added, the director's idea of making a ''broad operatic high farce'' in the spirit of commedia dell'arte kept leading them back to period music.
While in Venice, with Baroque concerts being held in a church beside the movie's production office, Mr. Mondshein began selecting passages of 18th-century music and testing them on different scenes. Vivaldi is, of course, the Venetian composer par excellence. But, eager to avoid too-familiar music, Mr. Mondshein also turned to Vivaldi's contemporary, Tomaso Albinoni.
Once the studio had given its tentative approval for period music, the production then recruited Roy Prendergast, a New York-based movie music editor with a background in classical music and composition. ''When I looked at the film, I thought, this is opera buffa, this is farce,'' he said in a telephone interview, ''and I realized that the opera repertory could provide the most cinematic material.''
Although Vivaldi and Albinoni each wrote more than 50 operas, few of them have been recorded, and not all were in the opera buffa style. In contrast, Jean-Philippe Rameau, the 18th-century French composer, presented Mr. Prendergast with a rich choice of comic operas. ''Casanova'' includes no vocal excerpts, but Mr. Prendergast borrowed overtures and dances from eight Rameau operas, including ''Platée,'' ''Zoroastre'' and ''Zaïs.''
''I sort of ripped through the entire recorded repertory and just pulled things that I felt would work,'' he recalled. ''I was aware of a large part of the Baroque repertory from my background, but there was also a lot of music that I discovered, which was delightful.''
Vivaldi and Albinoni were not overlooked: there are passages from four Vivaldi concertos and one opera, ''Farnace,'' as well as from four Albinoni concertos. Four other Italian composers were also used -- Giovanni Paisiello, Arcangelo Corelli, Leonardo Leo and Francesco Durante -- as well as Vicente Martín y Soler, from Spain, and Johan Helmich Roman, from Sweden. Even Handel and Telemann make cameo appearances in the score.
But what about Mozart? Although he was born in 1756, three years after the film is set, legend has it that he consulted Giacomo Casanova before composing ''Don Giovanni,'' his opera about another serial seducer. Indeed, there is evidence that Casanova himself attended the opera's premiere in Prague on Oct. 29, 1787.
''After spending two weeks listening to nothing but Baroque music, I finally said, 'Well, now we can go to Mozart,' '' Mr. Prendergast said. ''And I started listening to Mozart, and it was as if I had just come out of a different era. My God, what a radical! Mozart's style was so very, very different from this material. It just didn't play.''
Mr. Prendergast put together a track from existing recordings, but he found there were still gaps, notably in what he called ''the most intimate emotional moments.'' For these passages, the French composer Alexandre Desplat, who is credited for ''original music,'' and the American composer and conductor Sonny Kompanek wrote short sections in the Baroque style.
The entire score also had to be rerecorded, and here, Mr. Prendergast needed to find original sheet music, itself no easy task. Then, through a copy-and-paste job, he created his final version, which runs for around 60 minutes of the 105-minute movie. In July, more than 40 Baroque musicians -- named the Hollywood Studio Symphony for the occasion -- joined Mr. Kompanek in New York to record the score, using period instruments.
''I apologized to them beforehand,'' Mr. Prendergast recalled. ''I said, 'I am the person responsible for chopping all this music up.' But they were wonderful. They were all so delighted that Baroque music was getting this kind of exposure.''
For his final edit, Mr. Mondshein said, his inspiration was comic opera. ''We mixed the music as another voice in the film, not as a background score,'' he said. To this, Ms. Holleran added excitedly: ''The music became the support on which the film could rest. It was a great adventure on top of a great adventure.''
	Sixty years ago, Imre Kertész emerged as an emaciated Jewish teenager from the Nazi concentration camp at Buchenwald. Thirty years later, he relived his deportation, imprisonment and survival in a novel called ''Fateless.'' Now, at 76, the amiable Hungarian finds himself revisiting the experience as the writer of the script for a movie, also ''Fateless.''
''How can you not be touched by seeing your own story?'' asked Mr. Kertész, who won the 2002 Nobel prize for literature. ''I think the film is very beautiful, but it is not the book. The film is a visual thing. The child awakens immediate sympathy. The text should play a secondary role to the action and images.''
The notion of a ''beautiful'' Holocaust movie may seem as strange as the homesickness that Mr. Kertész recalled feeling for camp life when he returned to Budapest in July 1945. But ''Fateless'' is not a chronicle of the Holocaust as such. Rather, it is a coming-of-age story set amid humanity's ever-repeating cycles of barbarism.
The story has haunted much of Mr. Kertész's writing. And as author of the screenplay for Lajos Koltai's movie adaptation, which opens Friday at the Film Forum in New York, he is once again wrestling with these memories. He has condensed some scenes from the book, replaced most first-person narrative with visual metaphors and even added a couple of scenes.
''The film is more autobiographical than the book,'' he said in an interview at his Berlin home, where his wife, Magda, volunteered to interpret his Hungarian. ''I'm not even sure if I wrote the screenplay from memories or from memories of the book.''
Either way, the movie retains the dreamlike quality of the novel, recently published in a new English translation as ''Fatelessness'' (Vintage). And it is this quality that most distinguishes Mr. Kertész's very personal account of surviving the Holocaust. ''The film had to try very hard to avoid Holocaust clichés,'' Mr. Kertész said. ''It could be emotional, but never sentimental.''
In the novel, the story is recounted by Gyuri Köves, who is 14 in June 1944 when he is taken off a crowded bus in Budapest and deported with hundreds of other Jews to the Auschwitz death camp in Poland. In the movie, the story is seen mainly through the eyes of Gyuri, played by Marcell Nagy. In both cases, the plot advances in an almost matter-of-fact way.
Arriving in Auschwitz, Gyuri is told by other deportees to give his age as 16, a lie that saves him from immediate death. Three days later, he is sent to Buchenwald and subsequently to a labor camp at Zeitz, also in Germany. The months that follow are accompanied by fear, hunger, abuse and freezing temperatures, but also by moments of solidarity among the prisoners.
This solidarity saves Gyuri's life. Close to starvation, unable to work because of a badly injured knee, he is rescued from among the dying by political prisoners who enjoy privileges denied to Jews, including medical treatment. Gyuri is in the Buchenwald camp clinic -- where the doctors are also prisoners -- when American troops arrive.
In a scene not included in the novel, an American army officer, himself Jewish, encourages Gyuri to migrate to the United States, but the boy wants to return to his family in Budapest.
''The officer is a composite of various Americans who said the same thing,'' Mr. Kertész explained. ''For everyone, it was an important decision whether to return home or go somewhere else. Those who had an idea there would be socialism in Hungary did not go back. I couldn't imagine going anywhere except home. I was like a stray dog.''
But home was not as Mr. Kertész -- or Gyuri -- imagined it: his father had died in Mathausen, a Nazi labor camp in Austria; his stepmother had remarried; his home had been occupied by another family.
Even here, Gyuri cannot grasp that more than half a million Hungarian Jews have died in the Holocaust; when asked about the atrocities in the camps, he remembers his happiness.
''Yes,'' the novel concludes in Gyuri's voice, ''the next time I am asked, I ought to speak about that, the happiness of the concentration camps. If indeed I am asked. And provided I myself don't forget.''
If ''happiness'' in such circumstances still shocks, that was the author's intention. ''I took the word out of its everyday context and made it seem scandalous,'' Mr. Kertész said. ''It was an act of rebellion against the role of victim which society had assigned me. It was a way of assuming responsibility, of defining my own fate.''
Still, by the time the novel was published in 1975, Mr. Kertész was 45 and trapped in a different kind of camp, Hungary's Communist regime. And ''Fateless'' was largely ignored. Having lived off writing librettos for musical comedies, Mr. Kertész turned to translating German classics into Hungarian and did not publish another novel until 1988.
Then, with the collapse of the Soviet bloc, these and later novels were finally published in German and other European languages. But in Hungary, Mr. Kertész remained little read. In fact, although as early as 2000 he began discussing a screen adaptation of ''Fateless'' with Mr. Koltai, a veteran cinematographer, financing was only forthcoming after Mr. Kertész won the Nobel Prize in Literature in October 2002.
Mr. Koltai said he and Mr. Kertész agreed immediately to retell the story in the same linear fashion as the novel, without flashbacks or the use of archive images. ''We did not want sentimentality; we wanted to keep a distance,'' Mr. Koltai said in a telephone interview from Budapest. ''After Imre had finished the screenplay, he said, 'I give you this as a present, and then you give me the present back as a film.' ''
Costing $13 million, with 144 named roles and as many as 500 extras crowding a specially built ''concentration camp,'' ''Fateless'' is the most expensive Hungarian film ever made. It is also this year's most successful Hungarian film, as well as the Hungarian entry for best foreign language film at the 2006 Academy Awards.
''What was most exciting is that many teenagers went to see the movie in Hungary,'' Mr. Koltai said of the film, the first feature he has directed. ''They fall in love with the boy and realize that his fate could be their fate: just taken off a bus. It could happen to anyone anywhere in the world today.''
	The Dada movement made its name in the early 20th century by trying to destroy the conventional notion of art. Taking literal inspiration from their exploits this week, a latter-day neo-Dadaist took a small hammer to Marcel Duchamp's ''Fountain,'' the factory-made urinal that is considered the cornerstone of Conceptual Art.
The assailant, a French performance artist named Pierre Pinoncelli, was immediately arrested after his act of vandalism, which took place on Wednesday, during the final days of the ''Dada'' exhibition at the Pompidou Center. The porcelain urinal was slightly chipped in the attack and was withdrawn to be restored. (The exhibition runs through Monday.)
Mr. Pinoncelli, 77, who urinated into the same urinal and struck it with a hammer in a show in Nîmes in 1993, has a long record of organizing bizarre happenings. Police officials said he again called his action a work of art, a tribute to Duchamp and other Dada artists.
Indeed, ''Fountain'' itself was rejected for being neither original nor art when Duchamp offered it for the first exhibition of the Society of Independent Artists in New York in 1917. That version of the urinal, displayed upside down and signed ''R. Mutt,'' was subsequently lost. The Pompidou's ''Fountain'' is one of eight signed replicas made by Duchamp in 1964.
After the attack on Wednesday, Mr. Pinoncelli was held by the police overnight. He was released on Thursday and ordered to appear in court here on Jan. 24 to answer charges of damaging the property of others. As in 1993, he could face a prison term or a fine. (After the first urinal attack, he was jailed for a month and fined the equivalent of $37,500.)
The Pompidou Center said it was too early to know the cost of restoring the work. (Curators said a different Duchamp urinal was already scheduled for inclusion in the version of the show traveling to the National of Gallery of Art in Washington, Feb. 19 through May 14, and to the Museum of Modern Art in New York, June 18 through Sept. 11.) The vandalism raises the persistent question of how valuable works of art can be protected in museums that log millions of visitors each year. Many paintings on display today are shielded by glass. At the Louvre, the ''Mona Lisa,'' which was stolen in 1911 and struck by a stone in 1956, is now in a sealed enclosure behind 1.52-inch-thick glass.
Mr. Pinoncelli's attack also refocuses attention on the perennial question of what defines art. The question, playfully yet provocatively raised by the Dada movement nearly a century ago, has been refreshed since the 1980's by succeeding waves of Conceptual, installation and performance art. Like this week's case, such protests are often waged by artists themselves.
In 1999, for example, two Chinese artists, Yuan Cai and Jian Jun Xi Ianjun, jumped on ''My Bed,'' a work by the British artist Tracey Emin comprising an unmade bed accompanied by empty bottles, dirty underwear and used condoms, that was on view at Tate Britain. The following year, the same two artists urinated on the Tate Modern's version of ''Fountain,'' noting that Duchamp himself said artists defined art.
A British artist, Michael Landy, held what he called ''Break Down'' in an empty department store in London in 2001: in this happening, he destroyed all his possessions, including art donated by friends. Two other British artists, the Chapman brothers, were accused of vandalism in 2003 when they added the faces of clowns and puppets to the 80 etchings in an edition of Goya's ''Disasters of War'' that they had purchased.
In 1991, an artist generally described as unbalanced attacked Michelangelo's ''David'' statue in Florence, Italy, and damaged a foot.
Among numerous other protests, blue dye was sprayed over Carl Andre's display of bricks at the Tate Gallery in London in 1976, and black ink was squirted into a transparent container displaying Damien Hirst's dead sheep preserved in formaldehyde at the Serpentine Gallery in London.
Still, not all vandalism is intended: another work by Mr. Hirst on display in a Mayfair gallery in 2001 -- half-full coffee cups, dirty ashtrays, beer bottles and the like -- was thrown away by cleaners who mistook it for refuse. The same thing happened at Tate Britain in 2004 to a work by Gustav Metzger, a bag of trash titled ''Recreation of First Public Demonstration of Auto-Destructive Art.''
In the case of Mr. Pinoncelli, who could not be reached on Friday, nothing is accidental. After he urinated in and damaged ''Fountain'' in the Carré d'Art in Nîmes, he said he wanted to rescue the work from its inflated status and restore it to its original use as a urinal.
Since the early 1960's, Mr. Pinoncelli, based in Nice, has been busy with what he calls ''les happenings de rue,'' or ''street happenings.'' In 1969, he used a water pistol to spray red paint on André Malraux, who was then the French culture minister. In 1975, he ''held up'' a bank in Nice with a fake gun to protest Nice's decision to become Cape Town's twin city while South Africa was still under apartheid rule. The same year, he paraded outside Nice's courts, covered in large yellow stars, in what he called a homage to deported Jews.
Perhaps his most striking act unfolded in 2002 at a festival of performance art in the Colombian city of Cali. There, he protested the kidnapping of a Colombian politician, Ingrid Betancourt, by the country's leftist guerrillas by chopping off half of the smallest finger of his left hand. He then used his blood to write ''FARC,'' the acronym of the guerrilla group (the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia), on a white wall.
''The idea was to share in Colombia's violence,'' he told reporters at the time. But it apparently did not impress the guerrillas: Ms. Betancourt is still being held.
	