When executives of Unilever's home and personal care products division of North America decided in 2000 to seek cost savings by streamlining the distribution system, the company had 15 warehouses across the country, the result of mergers since the late 1980's with two other manufacturers, Chesebrough-Ponds and Helene Curtis.
Some warehouses stored cartons of soaps and detergents, fast-moving items that can be stacked on top of each other. Other warehouses contained hairsprays and other products that are ordered in smaller quantities and have to be handled more carefully because they come in aerosol containers. Truck drivers had to make multiple stops to fill their trailers, raising delivery costs.
To make its distribution system speedier and less costly, Unilever turned in 2001 to ProLogis, a real estate investment trust based in the Denver suburb of Aurora that helps companies solve their logistic problems -- not only by developing the warehouses but also by advising on new locations and local labor issues, overseeing negotiations for government incentives, securing financing and even contributing to the design of the racks inside the buildings.
Two and a half years later, Unilever had whittled its distribution network to five warehouses while losing only 500,000 square feet of office space. Each warehouse has 32-foot ceilings, occupies a million square feet and is one mile in circumference, except for the $15.5 million, 442,000-square-foot, cream-colored building in this Dallas suburb, which serves Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas. Each distribution center accommodates all the Unilever lines. The manufacturer says it has lowered its distribution costs by 7 percent.
Unilever's consolidation reflected, in part, the urgency that manufacturers feel to reduce distribution costs in response to pressures from Wal-Mart and other big-box retailers. These pressures are having a ''profound effect on the warehouse business,'' said James P. Sullivan, a senior analyst at Green Street Advisors, an independent company in Newport Beach, Calif., that specializes in real estate investment trusts.
''In an economy in which it's hard to raise prices,'' Mr. Sullivan said, ''companies have increasingly looked at the cost side and tried to figure out how to improve the bottom line. More and more warehouse users are employing this strategy.''
Fred M. Berkheimer, vice president for logistics at the Unilever division, acknowledged that demands from larger retailers drove the company to rethink its warehouses. ''You have to find ways to suck waste out of the system,'' he said. ''Some of the larger retailers push pretty hard.''
As a result, the siting of a warehouse has become something of a science. Once Unilever decided that it wanted to be in the Dallas area, ProLogis identified possible locations and then narrowed the choices to two. The site on Samuell Boulevard that was ultimately selected is not only close to several Interstate highways but is also a mile from Union Pacific Railroad's intermodal center, which can handle 225,000 transfers a year between railcars and trailers or containers. The location also passed other tests. ''If a truck has to make a left-hand turn with no light every time,'' said Rick Roth, a ProLogis first vice president, ''that's something to consider.''
Working with one real estate company allowed Unilever to achieve many economies of scale, including a uniform design and a standard lease for all five warehouses. The four larger distribution centers are in Pontoon Beach, Ill., outside St. Louis; Carlisle, Pa., near Harrisburg; Rialto, Calif., in Southern California; and Palmetto, Ga., a suburb of Atlanta. All are new, except the Palmetto warehouse, which was acquired by ProLogis in a 1999 merger with Meridian Industrial Trust and was expanded by 444,000 square feet.
Cost (including land, but not equipment) of the distribution centers ranged from $40 a square foot in Rialto to the ''high $20's'' in Mesquite, said John W. Seiple Jr., the president and chief operating officer at ProLogis North America. Rents are generally from 9.5 percent to 10 percent of the building's cost, he said. With the exception of the Palmetto warehouse, all the buildings are owned by Macquarie ProLogis Trust, a company listed on the Australian stock exchange that is a joint venture of ProLogis and Macquarie Bank, the international investment bank based in Sydney. ProLogis has retained a 15 percent interest in the properties, Mr. Seiple said.
Arlene Isaacs-Lowe, a senior vice president at Moody's Investors Service, said it made sense for manufacturers to deal with a single real estate company rather than a different one in each market. ''There isn't a lot of uniqueness to the kinds of facilities they want,'' she said, ''and it's far more consistent for them to deal with one developer who has expertise in a number of different markets.''
The new system has saved Unilever $20 million a year, Mr. Berkheimer said. The biggest savings have come in trucking and freight costs because each warehouse is equipped to handle all Unilever products, eliminating the extra stops.
In five years, he said, Unilever's product line has grown from about 1,200 items to about 2,000, reflecting the huge array of choices in household items. Just buying a bar of Dove soap today, for example, means deciding among ''new gentle exfoliation,'' ''all-day moisturizing,'' ''sensitive skin,'' ''nutrium nourishing'' or ''nutrium age-defying.'' And each version might be sold singly, in a double pack or in a shrink-wrapped package containing six or more bars.
As new products are introduced, others are discontinued, but generally at a slower rate. Mr. Seiple said ProLogis's research showed that in manufacturing, ''for every three products introduced, only one product gets taken away.''
Unilever is now able to make deliveries in one day to its customers at least 86 percent of the time, an improvement of about 14 percent, company executives said.
Michael W. Peters, a first vice president of ProLogis, said initially, many companies hope to do even better than that. ''When you show them how much it's going to cost,'' he said, ''they say, 'Well, maybe we can afford 85 percent.''' In what Mr. Berkheimer described as one of the company's toughest decisions, Unilever refrained from building a distribution center in Northern California or the Pacific Northwest, leaving a large section of the country uncovered. ''We'll wait and see if more people move up there,'' he said.
Other developers are also building larger warehouses in response to the proliferation of product variations. Five years ago, said Ted Antenucci, the president of Catellus Commercial Group, a division of Catellus Development Corporation of San Francisco, warehouses were usually 350,000 to 500,000 square feet. ''Now,'' he said, ''there is a lot of demand for warehouses over 600,000 square feet.''
Catellus has drawn repeat business from many clients, including Ford Motor, Gillette and Kellogg's, Mr. Antenucci said. But he said it was unusual for one developer to build an entire network of warehouses for one manufacturer, as ProLogis did.
Mr. Sullivan of Green Street Advisors said the centralized approach worked well for warehouses but was not practical for the office market. A chief executive looking for office space is likely to choose a location based on more personal considerations, he said. ''Office decisions tend to be made locally,'' Mr. Sullivan said. ''In the end, the guy in the office market is going to say, 'I like this location because it's close to where I live,' or 'I like this location because it's across the street from my favorite restaurant.'''
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
	AFTER terrorists destroyed the World Trade Center, the owners of a nearby luxury retirement and assisted-living home wondered if their new project was also doomed. Would elderly people want to live just four blocks from Ground Zero?
Four years later, the 14-story building, known as the Hallmark of Battery Park City, is fully rented and there is a waiting list with 40 names.
In Palo Alto, Calif., a new $370 million Classic Residence by Hyatt next to Stanford University charges entry fees ranging from $586,500 to $4.3 million. Monthly charges range from $3,105 to $7,430. The development opened in June and is already 88 percent full.
Only a few years ago, the commercial real estate sector known as senior housing was in trouble. Inexperienced (and sometimes unscrupulous) developers had overestimated the demand for assisted living and underestimated how long it would take to fill their units. With a strong economy and readily available capital, many companies went public, but by the late 1990's, their stocks had tumbled. Bankruptcies mounted, and many operators went out of business.
These days, however, the sector is in much better shape. ''Without a doubt, the industry is quite healthy now,'' said David S. Schless, president of the American Seniors Housing Association, a trade group. ''One of the things we're seeing is a growing acceptance on the part of institutional investors and others that typically have not been willing to invest in senior housing.''
Unlike age-restricted housing developments for active people in their mid-50's or older, senior housing is aimed at a more frail population, usually people in their 80's.
Residents have their own apartments (with kitchens), but their monthly fees include two meals or more as well as many social activities. Medical care is generally an added expense. Many homes also include units for people who need help with daily activities and for Alzheimer's patients, and some -- like the Palo Alto development -- also offer nursing care.
Development has slowed considerably since the 1990's. Last year, the top operators built 23,000 units, compared with 62,000 in 1999, said Robert G. Kramer, president of the National Investment Center for the Seniors Housing and Care Industries, a research organization in Annapolis, Md.
The number of public companies operating senior housing with services has shrunk from 18 to 6, and share prices have soared. ''The industry is absolutely in a rebound in terms of the stock performance,'' said Jerry L. Doctrow, a managing director at Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, a brokerage and investment banking firm.
Shares of Brookdale Senior Living, the rapidly expanding Chicago company that owns the Hallmark in Lower Manhattan, have risen from $19 at the company's public offering in November to $31.93 at yesterday's close.
In recent years, senior housing operators have been experimenting with different models. Sunrise Senior Living, for example, which used to specialize in assisted living, now offers a variety of housing types and services, including home health care. The company is also building condominium developments in Bethesda, Md., and Dallas, which will have the type of common areas and treatment rooms usually found only in rental buildings.
''Anybody who thinks that one size fits all is somebody who's going to fail,'' Mr. Kramer said ''The customer is looking for choice.''
For investors, senior housing is often seen as an appealing alternative to traditional apartment buildings because the initial returns, or capitalization rates, are higher -- an average of 9 percent, compared with 5 percent or less for conventional apartments.
Competition among investors for quality retirement homes has been increasing, however, and those properties are selling faster than they used to, said Mel Gamzon, president of Senior Housing Investment Advisors, a brokerage company in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. Some high-end homes are trading for as much as $225,000 a unit, according to the trade group, and capitalization rates for some properties have fallen to 7 percent or less.
''There's absolutely no question that dollar for dollar you get a much better return,'' said Gary R. Lucas, managing director for senior housing in the San Francisco office of Marcus & Millichap, an investment firm. ''But there is also a higher risk. It's not just real estate. It's not just a business. You're taking care of humans.''
One reason these properties are risky is that ever-rising labor costs make up a high percentage of an operator's expenses. According to industry figures, operators offset these increases by raising monthly fees by 4 percent to 6 percent a year.
In an October 2005 report, based on telephone calls to 873 assisted-living homes in 87 major markets throughout the country, the MetLife Mature Market Institute, a research arm of the insurance company, found that monthly rates had increased by 15.1 percent from 2004 to 2005 -- a figure that other senior housing specialists said was wildly off base. (When different levels of care were quoted, researchers used an average figure, which might have accounted for some of the discrepancy, said Sandra Timmermann, director of the institute.)
Operators need to know their market and avoid, say, installing chandeliers in places where they might not be welcome, said Noah R. Levy of Prudential Real Estate Investors, who manages senior housing funds. ''If you give me a not-so-fancy building but you've got a great operator, it can be a spectacular investment,'' he said. ''But give me a perfect building with a not-so-great operator, and I could lose a lot of money.''
Mr. Levy said he has only recently begun investing in large-scale developments that offer a range of care within the same building or campus and require a sizable entry fee, which is usually partly or mostly refundable when the resident moves or dies.
In the past, pension fund investors have tended to shy away from these so-called continuing care retirement communities because it was hard to pin a value on the real estate. About three-quarters of them are owned by nonprofit groups. Among them is the Amsterdam at Harborside in Port Washington, N.Y., which is being developed by Greystone Communities, now owned by Sunrise. Entrance fees will range from $399,000 to $1.9 million, and monthly charges will be $2,600 to $6,000.
The upscale version of this model is more profitable than other types of senior housing, but building such projects often requires years of planning. In New York, a state with only eight such developments, 70 percent of all the units have to be sold before developers can break ground, which means that potential residents have to be willing to wait.
''Some of my residents have told me, 'We don't even buy green bananas,' '' said Randal J. Richardson, the president of Classic Residence by Hyatt, a subsidiary of the hotel company. ''They say, 'We want to move in today.' '' Hyatt hopes to get final approval soon on a long-delayed project in Briarcliff Manor in Westchester County that will be similar to the new development in Palo Alto.
While many companies are growing through acquisition, Sunrise has 50 projects under development, said Paul J. Klaassen, chief executive of Sunrise. Only a handful are condominiums, including the two projects in Bethesda and Dallas, where units will probably be priced from around $500,000 to $2 million, with monthly fees about twice what an ordinary condo would command. Two floors with rental units will be set aside for people who need more care.
Response has been good, Mr. Klaassen said, but it is too early to tell if the ownership model will catch on. ''We don't know if it's going to be the next S.U.V. or minivan -- or if it's just going to be a niche player,'' he said.
Square Feet
	