Doing the math, you've got to figure that the 12 wise men and one wise woman had about 30 seconds apiece to say their piece to the president about Iraq, where vicious assaults this week have killed almost 200 and raised U.S. troop fatalities to at least 2,189.
It must have been like a performance by the Reduced Shakespeare Company, which boils down the great plays and books to their essence. Proust is ''I like cookies.'' Othello raps that he left Desdemona ''all alona, didn't telephona.'' ''The Iliad'' and ''The Odyssey'' condense into ''The Idiodity.'' ''Henry V'' is ''A king's gotta do what a king's gotta do,'' and ''Antony and Cleopatra'' is ''Never get involved in Middle Eastern affairs.''
Beyond taking a class picture spaced around Mr. Bush's bizarrely empty desk -- a mesmerizing blend of ''Sunset Boulevard,'' ''The Last Supper'' and a ''Sopranos'' ad -- the former secretaries of state and defense had to make the most of their brief colloquy with W.
The spectral Robert McNamara might have enlightened Mr. Bush on Vietnam: ''Didn't understand the culture. Misjudged the opposition. Didn't know when to get out.'' If he was a fast talker, he could have added: ''It's the dominoes. If Iraq falls, then Syria falls, then Lebanon falls, and before you know it, all of Southeast Asia -- I mean, the Middle East -- will fall.''
Melvin Laird only needed to add: ''Ditto.''
Al Haig's summation would have been a cinch: ''I resign. I'm in charge here. I resign -- again.''
Instead of maintaining his good-soldier silence, Colin Powell could have redeemed himself with four words: ''I should have resigned.''
Madeleine Albright might have succinctly imparted some wisdom from Somalia and Rwanda: ''Didn't understand the culture. Misjudged the threat. Didn't know when to get in.''
James Baker, Svengali and Sphinx, must have been thinking: ''I told your dad not to let you in here. I could tell you how to get out of Iraq in 10 minutes, but you're too under the sway of that nutball Cheney to listen.''
George Shultz only needed to say: ''I have a tiger tattooed on my fanny,'' and Lawrence Eagleburger could have abridged his thoughts to ''I need a smoke -- bad.''
It may seem disturbing at first that with several hundreds of years' worth of foreign policy at his elbows, and a bloody, thorny mess in Iraq, Mr. Bush would devote mere moments to letting some fresh air into his House of Pain.
Sure, he has A.D.D. But he just spent six straight days mountain-biking and clearing brush in Crawford. He couldn't devote 60 minutes to getting our kids home, rather than just a few for a ''Message: I Care'' photo-op faking sincerity?
''We all went into the bubble and came out,'' one of the wise men noted.
Mr. Eagleburger explained their role as props, saying it was hard to volubly express yourself with a president. ''There was some criticism, but it was basically 'You haven't talked to the American people enough.' '' Lighting a cigarette on the way out -- he'd thrown one in the bushes on the way in -- he added a world-weary coda: ''We're all has-beens anyway.''
Mr. Eagleburger knows the truth. If W. had wanted to really reach out, rather than just pretend to reach out so his poll numbers would go up, he would have sought advice outside his warped inner circle long ago -- including from his own father.
Because W.'s mind is so closed to anybody except yes-men who tell him his policies and wars are slam-dunks, uneasy seasoned mandarins are forced to make a noisy stink. Brent Scowcroft, one of Bush Senior's closest friends, had to resort to the pages of The New Yorker to voice his objections. He ominously said Dick Cheney, his old colleague, was someone he no longer recognized.
You wonder whether the other contemporaries of Cheney and Rummy from Ford, Reagan and Bush I days were thinking the same thing at Thursday's meeting: Why have these guys gone so kooky?
W. is drunk on Cheney Kool-Aid. So he got testy when Ms. Albright pointed out that North Korea and Iran were going nuclear while the U.S. was bogged down in Baghdad. Then, after a quick photo in the Oval, he shooed the old-timers out, letting anyone who wanted to stay talk to the security factotum Stephen Hadley.
Still busy spreading fog over the war, W., Cheney, Rummy and Condi had no time to hear Mr. McNamara expound on the fog of war. In the picture, as Ms. Albright cringes, Mr. McNamara looks haunted, unable to escape second-guessing over Vietnam.
The only thing that would have made the photo even more utterly phony than it was would have been the presence of that vintage warmonger, Henry the K.
Op-Ed Columnist
	In the Ford White House, Dick Cheney's Secret Service name was Backseat, because he was the model of an unobtrusive staffer, the perfect unflashy deputy chief of staff for that lord of the bureaucratic dance, Donald Rumsfeld.
As James Mann writes in his new book, ''The Rise of the Vulcans: The History of Bush's War Cabinet,'' Mr. Cheney started out supervising such lowly matters as fixing a stopped-up drain in a White House bathroom sink; getting a headrest for Betty Ford's helicopter seat; and sorting out which salt shakers -- the regular ones or, as he put it, the ''little dishes of salt with funny little spoons'' -- would be best for stag dinners in the president's private quarters.
Rummy's alter ego rose quickly, though, because he seemed to have no ego. Good old Dick could be counted on to be the man behind the man, a butler to power. The new President Bush, a tabula rasa in foreign affairs, put himself in Mr. Cheney's hands.
But W. had barely settled into the Oval when Backseat clambered into the front seat. Retracing the rush to war, the names Cheney and Chalabi are entwined in bold relief.
Back when Dick Cheney was fiddling with salt shakers, Ahmad Chalabi, a smooth-talking and wealthy young Iraqi M.I.T. graduate, was founding the Petra Bank in Jordan.
As Mr. Cheney moved up in the capital, Mr. Chalabi was tripped up in Jordan by a small matter of embezzlement from his own bank. Jordanian officials have said that the crime rocked their economy and that they paid $300 million to depositors to cover the bank's losses. By the time Mr. Chalabi was convicted and received a sentence of 22 years of hard labor, he was a fugitive in London.
During the early 90's, when Mr. Cheney was a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, Mr. Chalabi was in a full courtship press with Washington's conservative and journalistic elites. He saw them as a springboard for his triumphant return to Iraq.
After 9/11, his passionate desire to take out Saddam coincided with that of conservatives. All they needed for their belli was a casus, so Mr. Chalabi obligingly conned the neocons.
He hoodwinked his pals Dick Cheney, Paul Wolfowitz and Richard Perle into believing Iraq would be a flowery cakewalk to democracy.
A wily expert in the politics of the bazaar, he knew he had to sell his scheme on what was good for Americans and their security. He was happy to funnel information to the vice president that painted a picture of Saddam hunkered on a hair-raising stockpile of W.M.D. His group, the Iraqi National Congress, tried to spin our government and media through its ''information collection program.'' Intelligence officials now say that the prewar information provided to Washington by this group was suspect and useless, even disinformation.
But here's the wild thing: the propaganda program was underwritten by U.S. government funds. So Americans paid Ahmad Chalabi to gull them into a war that is costing them a billion a week -- and a precious human cost. Cops dealing with their snitches check out the information better than the Bush administration did.
Mr. Chalabi's séances swayed the political set, the intelligence set and the journalistic set. In an effect Senator Bob Graham dubs ''incestuous amplification,'' the bogus stories spewed by Iraqi exiles and defectors ricocheted through an echo chamber of government and media, making it sound as if multiple, reliable sources were corroborating the same story. Rather, one self-interested source was replicating like computer spam.
The C.I.A. was stung to find out its analysts had mistakenly thought that Iraq weapons information had been confirmed by multiple sources, when it came from only a single source; that analysts had relied on a fabricating Iraqi defector and spin material from Iraqi exiles; and that this blather made its way into documents and speeches used by the Bush administration to justify war. George Tenet ordered a major change in procedure last week, removing barricades so that analysts can know more about the identities of clandestine agents' sources, and their possible motives.
But even incestuous amplification could not have drowned out reality if Bush officials had not glommed onto the Chalabi flummery for their own reasons -- to feed their fantasies about refashioning America's power, psyche and military, and making over the Middle East in our image.
Swept up in big dreams, the foreign policy dream team became dupes in Ahmad Chalabi's big con.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com
	There was a touch of parody to the giddy Democrat takeover this week: Nancy Pelosi indulging her inner Haight-Ashbury and dipping the Capitol in tie-dye, sashaying around with the Grateful Dead, Wyclef Jean, Carole King, Richard Gere, feminists and a swarm of well-connected urchins.
The first act of House Democrats who promised to govern with bipartisan comity was imperiously banishing Republicans from participating in the initial round of lawmaking. Even if Republicans were brutes during their reign, Democrats should have shown more class, letting the whiny minority party offer some stupid amendments that would lose.
Perhaps the Democrats' power-shift into overdrive is a neurological disorder, or neuropolitical disorder.
If free will is an illusion -- if we are, as one philosopher put it, ''nothing more than sophisticated meat machines,'' doomed to repeat the same mistakes over and over -- that would explain a lot about the latest trend in which everyone is reverting to type.
William James wrote in 1890 that the whole ''sting and excitement'' of life comes from ''our sense that in it things are really being decided from one moment to another, and that it is not the dull rattling off of a chain that was forged innumerable ages ago.''
But in Science Times this week, Dennis Overbye advised Dr. James to ''get over it,'' observing that ''a bevy of experiments in recent years suggest that the conscious mind is like a monkey riding a tiger of subconscious decisions and actions in progress, frantically making up stories about being in control.''
As Mark Hallett of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke told Mr. Overbye, ''Free will does exist, but it's a perception, not a power or a driving force.  The more you scrutinize it, the more you realize you don't have it.''
That would explain why, after voters insisted that the president wrap it up in Iraq, he made a big show of pretending to listen, then decided to do a war do-over.
Is this just the baked-in stubbornness of one man, or is W.'s behavior evidence that he has no free will? Is the Decider freely choosing another huge blunder or is he taking instructions from his genetic and political coding, fearing that if he admits what a foul hash he's made of Iraq, he'll be labeled a wimp, as his dad was?
If W. is trapped on a tiger, he's not the only one.
John McCain can't get beyond seeing himself as a maverick now that he's become a nonmaverick, a right-wing Republican urging an escalation of a hopeless war, even though he's already lived through an escalation of a hopeless war.
''There are two keys to any surge in U.S. troops,'' Senator McCain told an appreciative audience at the American Enterprise Institute yesterday. ''It must be substantial, and it must be sustained.''
With the letter she and Harry Reid wrote to the president yesterday, warning him that ''we are well past the point of more troops for Iraq,'' Speaker Pelosi tried to exert her free will to stop the Surge. But the Democrats aren't willing to take real action and cut off money for the Surge. They're predetermined to want to have it both ways: not to be blamed for the war and not to be blamed for pulling the plug on the war.
Iraq has become a snake pit of factions failing to escape fate. Shiites and Sunnis have been fighting and killing each other for about 1,400 years over who was the rightful heir to Muhammad, and yet the entire American high command was somehow taken aback that Shiites and Sunnis can't muster the free will to keep their country from disintegrating.
Could it have been kismet that there were Shiites taunting Saddam at his hanging? Maybe it was preordained back in the days when Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone and the British diplomat Gertrude Bell drew the boundaries of the modern Iraq that a security guy with a cellphone would capture the spectacle.
Despite all the talk back in the 2000 campaign about a robustly experienced foreign-policy dream team, it may have been destined that the Bush administration would be asleep in the run-up to the insurgency, just as it was asleep in the run-up to 9/11, to Katrina, to the occupation and to the refugee crisis in Iraq. Either all that was predetermined, or the administration was preternaturally negligent.
Arthur Schopenhauer, the German philosopher who said a man can do what he wants but cannot will what he wants, would have understood W.'s nonsensical urge to Surge.
We don't know if human beings have free will. We just know that human beings in Washington appear not to.
Op-Ed Columnist
	Young Americans are bravely fighting and dying in Iraq, trying to fulfill the audacious vision of George W. Bush and Dick Cheney to remold Iraq in the image of America.
But while we try to turn them into us, who have we become?
The president presents himself as an avatar of American values, plain-spoken cowboy and tough flyboy.
But Condi Rice's testimony on Thursday raises the depressing possibility that we've lost the essence of our frontier spirit: the ingenious individualist who gets around the system and faces down the drones.
From Abigail Adams to Tom Sawyer to Bugs Bunny to Jimmy Stewart's Jefferson Smith to Indiana Jones, the best American character is plucky, nimble, clever, inventive.
So it's disturbing to see our government reacting to crises with a jaded shrug and lumbering gait, especially since we are up against such a creative, chameleonlike enemy.
Consider the pathetic performance of NASA, which inverted its motto to ''Failure is an option'' by shrugging off warnings about the safety of the seven Columbia astronauts who burned up coming back to earth, and not trying to send up a rescue shuttle.
This no-can-do spirit marked George Tenet's lame excuses to senators in February who wanted to know why the C.I.A. never picked up the trail of Marwan al-Shehhi, the pilot who crashed Flight 175 into the south tower on 9/11, even though the Germans gave the agency his name and phone number. ''They didn't give us a first and a last name until after 9/11,'' Mr. Tenet said.
And what would Eliot Ness say about an F.B.I. that is less computer savvy than American preschoolers and Islamic terrorists? The F.B.I. is only halfway through modernizing its computers, which could not, before 9/11, do two searches at once, such as ''Al Qaeda'' and ''flight schools.'' Can't we draft Bill Gates for duty?
This ominous passivity was threaded through the testimony of Ms. Rice, a brainy and accomplished woman who should represent the best of America. She blamed ''systemic'' and ''structural'' impediments that prevented the C.I.A. and the F.B.I. from sharing. She complained that other people hadn't recommended what she should do; even the terrorists were faulted for not giving specifics.
The screeching chatter in the spring and summer of 2001 -- ''There will be attacks in the near future'' -- did not yank Mr. Bush and his team from their Iraq fixation. ''But they don't tell us when,'' Ms. Rice protested. ''They don't tell us where, they don't tell us who, and they don't tell us how.'' Paging Nancy Drew.
Inconclusive intelligence did not bother the Bush team when it wanted to be ''actionable'' on Iraq, or engage in ''tit for tat'' with Saddam.
The Aug. 6, 2001, presidential daily briefing -- remarkably headlined ''Bin Laden Determined to Attack Inside the United States'' -- mentioned Al Qaeda's wanting to hijack planes and the 70 F.B.I. field investigations into suspected Al Qaeda sleeper cells in the U.S.
The briefing had three-month-old information that Al Qaeda was trying to sneak into the country for an explosives attack. No wonder the C.I.A. chief and counterterrorism czar were running around with their hair on fire.
What should have made Condi hysterical, she deemed ''historical.''
W. kept fishing and denouncing Saddam, while Condi sat for a glam Vogue photo shoot and interview.
On Iraq, they ran roughshod over the system. On Al Qaeda, Condi blamed the system, saying she couldn't act on Richard Clarke's plan until there was a strategy, a policy, ''tasking,'' meetings, etc.
The F.B.I. officials who ignored Coleen Rowley as she tried to break through the obtuse leadership of Louis Freeh's F.B.I. to get evidence on Zacarias Moussaoui, and Kenneth Williams, the Phoenix agent who outlined the Al Qaeda plot to train Arab terrorists in our flight schools, have not been held accountable. Why aren't the heroic Ms. Rowley and Mr. Williams running something?
Dick Clarke has struck a chord because his passionate efforts reflected those great American virtues of ingenuity and brashness. Even if he was a bit of a cowboy, loading up his .357 sidearm to return to the West Wing the night after 9/11, at least he was not dozing through High Noon.
My last column should have identified Iraqis fighting inside a Falluja mosque as Sunnis, and the Iraq turnover date as June.
E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com
	I went to Iowa hunting Howard Dean. His campaign said he might give me five minutes. On the phone.
At first, five minutes sounded pretty cursory. But I decided to be philosophical. Out of his 15 minutes of angry fame, Howard Dean was willing to devote a third of it to me.
How best to figure out someone who comes out of nowhere and wants to lead the world in five minutes?
I quizzed Tom Harkin, Mr. Iowa, about why he had endorsed Dr. Dean, even though it infuriated his spurned Senate buddy John Kerry and disappointed fellow Midwesterner Dick Gephardt. Senator Harkin didn't seem especially close to the Vermont governor. At the 2002 Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner here, he twice called the Democrat John Dean (as Martin Sheen did in a speech here last week).
''He's a fire hydrant,'' Mr. Harkin said over dinner at Bambino's in Cumming. ''If you kick it, it's going to hurt you. But it's stable and secure and there when you need it.''
It wasn't the most glamorous metaphor. But I knew what he meant.
Democrats yearn for somebody tough enough to stand up to the Bush family machine. They're still smarting that Al Gore lost a presidency he won. They watched even a fellow as gritty as John McCain crumple during the 2000 South Carolina primary, stunned by the sulfurous personal attacks of Bush supporters.
A fire hydrant sprays back.
Dr. Dean has certainly proved he's tough. The press critiques on him -- ''hotheaded,'' ''arrogant,'' ''mercurial,'' ''a jerk'' -- echo the knocks on W., back before ''the Roman candle'' of the Bush family ran for Texas governor and transformed himself into a disciplined and genial campaigner.
After months of watching Dr. Dean's neck bulging, face churning, and sleeves rolled up tourniquet-tight, many of my colleagues were longing to ask the pugilistic pol, as one put it: ''Do you ever lighten up, dude?''
I decided to use my five minutes to find out if he has the sunny side Americans love in their leaders. I'd ask him what he'd want to do for fun on a Saturday night if he could play hooky. I'd ask him the last time he did something goofy and what made him really laugh.
While I was waiting for him to call, I grew more and more afraid that he'd get angry at me for wasting his time with piffle. I cowered by the phone, jumping when it rang.
I never got the five minutes with him. Which left me five minutes to think about why his candidacy was sputtering.
He has a problem with his mythic arc. Presidential campaigns trace the patterns of mythological adventure, as contenders strive to show they are superior in the knightly virtues of temperance, loyalty and courage.
Once candidates showed that they had completed the ''hero-task'' by highlighting their war exploits -- J.F.K. and PT 109, George Bush senior getting shot down as a young Navy pilot over Chichi Jima.
Candidates in the Vietnam War generation who chose not to go to Vietnam had to find more personal dragons and giants to slay. Bill Clinton told the story of confronting an abusive and alcoholic stepfather; George W. Bush recounted overcoming alcoholism and career drift by embracing Christ.
In Iowa, Mr. Gephardt talks about the transforming experience of his son's battle against cancer. Mr. Kerry describes the crucible of Vietnam. John Edwards's arc is going from the son of a millworker to a Grishamesque trial lawyer standing up against corporate malefactors.
Shunning personal storytelling, Dr. Dean has chosen to make his campaign arc about his campaign arc. He brags of facing down the dragon George W. Bush.
As he said at a rally here last week about his Democratic rivals: ''They weren't there when it was time to stand up to the president on the war in Iraq. . . . If you want someone to stand up to George Bush, I've done it.''
Personal history shouldn't be a substitute for policy. An overreliance on stories of dramatic heroism and physical suffering can overwhelm a campaign, as it did with Bob Kerrey and Bob Dole, devolving into the politics of self. And yuppie sagas of sin and redemption can become strained with repetition.
But a race rooted mainly in attacking the president may not take Dr. Dean far enough. Voters want someone who's been through the fire. They care about character. They want to know the evolution of the man, even if it's a myth.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com
	Madame Speaker didn't lean over and boink the president on the head with her gavel, or garrote him with her red pashmina.
No one was gelded or cuckolded or left to bleed on the floor of the Senate, as in HBO's ''Rome,'' that other gory saga of a declining empire with people who can't stop talking.
Still, the nation's capital had the aroma of treachery, as former allies brutally turned on one another. Despite W.'s attempt to salvage his presidency last night by changing the subject and going all domestic-sensitive, Washington was more consumed with betrayal than substance.
The city was riveted by opening statements in the Scooter Libby trial, where the aspens were turning but not in clusters. Scooter's lawyer claimed that the White House had made his client a scapegoat in the Valerie Plame case to protect Karl Rove because ''Boy Genius,'' as W. calls him, was critical to keeping the Republican Party in power.
In light of the 2006 debacle, the White House might have been better off saving Scooter and making Karl the fall guy.
Vice got an extra dose of unflattering limelight in the debut issue of The Politico, a Capitol Hill publication. In an interview with Roger Simon, John McCain stopped pandering to the White House long enough to lambaste Dick Cheney for stirring a ''witch's brew'' of a ''terribly mishandled'' war. What took the brave senator so long?
''The president listened too much to the vice president,'' he said, adding, ''Of course, the president bears the ultimate responsibility, but he was very badly served by both the vice president and, most of all, the secretary of defense.''
At a critical hearing yesterday, senators happily blew a chance to grill Lt. Gen. David Petraeus, W.'s choice to try to rescue Iraq, on whether those 21,500 additional troops will be cavalry to the rescue or lambs to the slaughter.
Why dwell on the most consequential elements of American strategy when they can linger over something even more repercussive: their own political reputations?
Hillary Clinton, who dodged a recent important Iraq hearing by flying to Iraq, did not have any questions at all for the general. She simply lectured him crisply on her belated discovery that the administration has a ''dead-end'' and ''blank check'' policy, as she tried to seem like the kind of gal who could command the most powerful military on earth. This is odd from someone who is running infomercials on her Web site promising ''a conversation.''
In their questioning, Senator Joe Lieberman and Mr. McCain seemed most interested in enlisting the general's prestige for their own campaign to discredit colleagues in both parties who are tired of passively watching W.'s disaster unfold.
If the Senate sends the additional troops but conveys the belief they cannot succeed, Mr. McCain asked, ''what effect does that have on the morale of your troops?''
''It would not be a beneficial effect,'' the general replied.
Senator Lieberman also asked whether a Senate resolution expressing disapproval of The Surge would give the enemy in Iraq ''encouragement'' that the American people ''were divided.''
The general agreed: ''That's correct, sir.''
Much of the rest of the hearing was squandered in attempts by Democrats and Republicans who had criticized the war to get the general to back away from his opinion that the troops would be hurt and the enemy emboldened by any impediment that the legislative branch might throw in W.'s way.
''Honorable people have different views, and they will voice their criticisms,'' chided John Warner, who presented a bipartisan resolution on Monday declaring that the Senate ''disagrees with the 'plan' to augment our forces.''
He told General Petraeus that as President Nixon's secretary of the Navy, he had sat where the general was, justifying another impossible war. ''I hope,'' he warned the witness, ''that this colloquy has not entrapped you into some responses that you might later regret.''
The fact that Senator Warner attacked The Surge in a formal way means that a substantial majority of the Senate are willing to stick their necks out. It's the beginning of a slow procession to limit spending on the war and rein in Mr. Bush.
As one does in a job interview, the general tried to oblige everyone. After getting caught in a political mine field, he demurred that he had learned ''that mine fields are best avoided and gone around rather than walked through.''
The poor man. He probably thought that he came all this way to talk about how to fight the war, not to talk about how to talk about the war.
Op-Ed Columnist
	When she was little, Hillary Rodham would sit on a basement bench and pretend she was flying a spaceship to Mars. Her younger brother Hugh, perched behind, would sometimes beg for a chance to be captain.
No dice. ''She would always drive, and I would always have to sit in the back,'' he once told me.
Through all the years of sitting behind Bill Clinton on his trip to the stars, Hillary fidgeted and elbowed, trying to be co-captain rather than just wingman, or worse, winglady.
Finally, in Iowa, she was once more behind the wheel of her spaceship to Mars. She didn't have to prop up Bill after one of his roguish pratfalls. She didn't have to feign interest in East Wing piffle -- table settings and pastry chefs and designer gowns. She didn't have to defer to her male colleagues in the Senate, stepping back to give them the limelight.
She positively glistened as she talked about how ''I'' -- rather than the ''we'' of '92 -- would run the world.
Humbly, graciously, deftly, she offered Iowa the answer to that eternal question, What Is Hillary Owed?
Everything.
John Wood, a self-described ''plainsman,'' Republican and machinery-and-tool salesman from Davenport, asked Hillary how she would handle the world's evil and bad men, provoking the slyly ambiguous retort: ''What in my background equips me to deal with evil and bad men?''
He said afterward that he was more worried about her ability to face down villains, ''being a lady,'' but conceded, ''The woman did good today.''
(His question was reminiscent of Ali G's interview of Newt Gingrich, when the faux rapper asked whether a woman president would be turned on and manipulated by evil dictators, given that, with women, ''the worse you treat 'em, the more they want you.'')
As YouTube attests, Hillary didn't care about style as first lady; she was too busy trying to get in on Bill's substance. She showed off a long parade of unflattering outfits and unnervingly changing hairdos.
In Iowa, her national anthem may have been off-key, but her look wasn't. It was an attractive mirror of her political message: man-tailored with a dash of pink femininity.
''I think you look very nice,'' a veteran of the first gulf war told her in Des Moines.
''Thank you!'' she answered, beaming and laughing.
When Geraldine Ferraro made her historic run in '84, she tried to blend a mother's concerns into her foreign policy answers, but it did not work so well once she started getting her nuclear terminology mixed up.
Hillary dealt with the issue head-on -- ''I'm a woman; I'm a mom'' -- hoping to stir that sisterly vote that Ms. Ferraro failed to draw after it turned out that many women were skeptical about one of their own facing down the Soviets.
Unlike Barack Obama, who once said he was bored by the suburbs, she introduced herself in the land of bingo and bacon as a product of the suburbs, wallowing in the minutiae of kitchen-table issues.
W. and Cheney have lavished attention and money on Iraq, leaving Americans feeling neglected. Hillary offered Iowans a warm bath of ''you,'' homey rumination rather than harsh domination.
(Though Jon Stewart warned on ''The Daily Show'' that her slogan -- ''Let the conversation begin!'' -- will not help her with men. ''I think the typical response would be, 'Now?' '' he said, adding that her new Iraq policy is, ''America, let's pull over and just ask for directions.'')
Thomasine Johnson, a 66-year-old African-American from outside Des Moines, complained that Hillary talked too much about ''traditional women's issues,'' but many in the audiences seemed enthralled.
The Achilles' heel of ''The Warrior,'' as she is known, is the war. She expressed outrage about Iraq, but ended up sounding like a mother whose teenage son has not cleaned up his room: ''The president has said this is going to be left to his successor  and I think it's the height of irresponsibility, and I really resent it.''
She uttered the most irritating and disingenuous nine words in politics: ''If we had known then what we know now. ''
Jim Webb knew. Barack Obama knew. Even I knew, for Pete's sake. The administration's trickery was clear in real time.
Hillary didn't have the nerve to oppose a popular president on a national security issue after 9/11, and she feared being cast as an antiwar hippie when she ran. Now she feels she can't simply say she made a bad decision. And that makes her seem conniving -- not a good mix with nurturing.
Op-Ed Columnist
	I'm not going all confessional, like one of these bare actresses baring her soul on the cover of Vanity Fair. But I have a desperate secret, as the actresses like to say, that may help others if I talk about it.
Or not.
I am a sleep-eater.
It has happened only a few times, and I'm not sure if it's connected to Ambien. It started last year when a jumbo pack of Oreos mysteriously went missing in my kitchen. I came down one morning to find the plastic sliced open and all the cookies gone. I called my exterminator, certain there was a crumb-covered critter lurking. He never found one.
A couple of other times, when I was staying in hotels with minibars, I found Snickers wrappers by the bed or telltale Toblerone chocolate smears.
I confided in a friend, a fellow occasional Ambien user, who said he woke up sometimes with Jackson Pollock-like splatters of Good & Plenty on his white T-shirts.
New Yorkers have been calling their doctors and nutritionists this week to see whether they should switch hypnotics, now that Minnesota researchers have suggested that Ambien may be creating a new form of ravenous sleeper cells, an alarming development given that some people had actually been taking Ambien to avoid the urge to stay up and raid the fridge.
It may just be a new form of avoirdupois rationalization. (That's my story, dear, and I'm sticking to it.) But a California woman included in one of the studies said she gained 100 pounds from sleep-eating while on Ambien; a Minneapolis woman in a full body cast was discovered by her son sleepwalking to her kitchen, frying bacon and eggs on one night and turning on her oven to 500 degrees on another; a Tennessee nurse said she'd devoured a whole package of hamburger rolls ''like a grizzly bear.''
Susan Chana Lask, a New York City lawyer, has filed a class-action suit against the makers of Ambien on behalf of users -- who are overwhelmingly female. She gives examples of bad behavior by what she calls '' 'Night of the Living Dead' creatures'': driving impaired and eating raw eggs and even a buttered cigarette, and sleep-shoplifting DVD's.
Far more women suffer from insomnia, and far more women -- even young ones -- pop sleeping pills than men. As Ariel Levy wrote in New York magazine, pills are now seen as ''brain styling,'' not mind-altering, because ''the line between medication and recreation has become blurred.''
One girlfriend of mine wanted to call her Upper East Side doctor yesterday and switch to Lunesta. ''I have visions of myself in my Subaru crossing the George Washington Bridge at 3 in the morning covered in Cheetos dust,'' she said. But then she realized they'd probably find out something equally weird about Lunesta next week -- that it causes you to run off with a Starbucks barista and go to male strip clubs in your sleep.
The scary news of zombie hordes of Ambien sleep-eaters follows fast upon the scary news of zombie hordes of Ambien sleep-drivers and zombie hordes of Ambien sleep-sirens.
The New York Observer recounted the saga of an attractive editor at a fashion magazine who hooked up with a young man in Soho and took him back to her place.
''She was laying there and had taken her clothes off,'' he told the paper. ''Then, in completely slurred speech, she said: 'I just took two Ambien, so anything you're going to do, you better do it before I pass out.' ''
The next mishap is sure to be sleep-governing. A headline on Wednesday read ''Study: Ambien Users Invade Countries in Their Sleep; Wake Up With No Memory of Reasons for Invasion, No Exit Strategy.'' The story was written by the humorist Andy Borowitz, who also imagined that an Ambien side effect might be a tendency of some politicians to concoct incomprehensible prescription drug programs while asleep.
But real life once more outstrips satire, as the military in Iraq conducts Ambien air assaults. The president and some Pentagon officials have no memory of authorizing the strikes, and the generals in Iraq have no memory that they've already used these tactics without lasting success.
There is, after all, precedent for Sleepers in Chief. The first President Bush's doctor caught flak for giving him the sleeping pill Halcion -- fingered as a possible contributor to Poppy's embarrassing frow-up moment at a state dinner in Japan.
If you don't want to give up Ambien, doctors say, put chimes on your bedroom door. The tinkling may wake you up on the way to get a snack or take a drive to shoplift a new wardrobe for your fat zombie self.
Op-Ed Columnist John Tierney is on vacation.
	Maybe I've had Dick Cheney wrong all along.
Maybe he's not maniacally secretive, manipulative with the truth and contemptuous of democratic institutions. Perhaps he's cruelly misunderstood in his heartfelt desire to disseminate information.
It was at the end of his interview with Brit Hume, when Shooter talked about Scooter, that his eagerness to share important facts with the press and public -- a well-concealed trait in recent days, years and decades -- burst forth. He pronounced himself a Great Declassifier.
Asked by the Fox News anchor if a vice president had the authority to declassify secrets, Mr. Cheney replied that there's an executive order giving him that power, adding: ''I've certainly advocated declassification and participated in declassification decisions.'' This neatly set up a defense for Scooter, who testified that ''superiors'' had authorized him to leak classified information on Valerie Plame.
President Bush signed Executive Order 13292 on March 25, 2003, amending a Clinton-era order, to grant the vice president the same power as the president on top-secret material. W. must have been concerned that Vice didn't have enough power to abuse.
(With the way these guys keep giving themselves extra powers, there are probably also executive orders that allow Vice-Man to turn himself into a dragon, become invisible and leap tall buildings in a single bound.)
In return for this selfless effort to tell the world that Valerie Plame was a C.I.A. officer -- and punish her husband, a critic of the phony case for war, and therefore a terrorist symp -- Shooter was rewarded with an independent prosecutor and Scooter with an indictment. So when the Great Declassifier gunned down his hunting partner, he was compelled by bitter experience to override his instinct to immediately call a press conference.
The administration has been so apoplectic about leaks, I almost forget the entire Iraq war was paved by its leaks. Cheney & Co. were so busy trying to prove a mushroom cloud was emanating from Saddam's direction, they could not leak their cherry-picked stories fast enough.
Maybe I've had Rummy wrong, too. Maybe he's not an arrogant, misguided Robert McNamara clone.
In his speech to the Council of Foreign Relations yesterday, he sounded positively humble. Gone were the days when Rummy and the neocons thought a big Shock-and-Awe blaze of American might would make Islamic terrorists tremble in their Flintstones caves, never to challenge us again.
Now Rummy paints America as backward, losing the P.R. war to Al Qaeda in the first conflict in history using e-mail, blogs, BlackBerries and hand-held videocameras. ''For the most part,'' he said, ''the U.S. government still functions as a five-and-dime store in an eBay world.'' (Hey, didn't we invent eBay?)
Like the vice president, the defense secretary is eager to get information out. If the American press wouldn't scream, ''Henny Penny, the sky is falling,'' every time the Pentagon tries to plant paid stories in the Iraqi press, for gosh sakes, maybe we could have some success in the P.R. battle.
After the Lincoln Group's ''nontraditional means,'' as he delicately put it, were discovered, ''the resulting explosion of critical press stories then causes everything, all activity, all initiative, to stop, just frozen.''
''Even worse,'' he complained, ''it leads to a chilling effect for those who are asked to serve in the military public affairs field.'' The press ''seems to demand perfection from the government,'' he wailed. And why do the media focus on Abu Ghraib, perpetrated by ''people on the night shift, one night shift in Iraq?'' he asked. Why not more stories on Saddam's mass graves?
Rummy is genuinely perplexed about why it's wrong to subvert democracy while promoting democracy.
I love it when Shooter and Rummy call us unrealistic for trying to hold them to standards that they set. They are, after all, victims of their own spin on Iraq. Mr. Cheney thought we'd be greeted with flowers; Rummy said we could do more with less.
Rummy misses the point: we're supposed to be the good guys, the beacon of freedom. Our message is supposed to work because it has moral force, not because we pay some Lincoln Group sketchballs millions to plant propaganda in Iraqi newspapers and not because the press here plays down revelations of American torture. If the Bush crew hadn't distorted the truth to get to Iraq, it wouldn't need to distort the truth to succeed there.
''Ultimately, in my view,'' Rummy concluded, ''truth wins out.''
Bad news for him, and his pal Dick.
Op-Ed Columnist
Correction:  March 8, 2006, Wednesday  My column of Feb. 18 said that Scooter Libby testified that ''superiors'' had authorized him to leak classified information about Valerie Plame. Rather, Mr. Libby testified that ''superiors'' had authorized him to leak classified information from an intelligence report to rebut critics and justify the Iraq war, not information about Valerie Plame.
	