A big trial starts in federal court here on Monday, involving some very prominent executives who used to work for a very prominent company. Across the country, people will be following the case with great interest.
But in Houston, many residents prefer to focus on other things, like the resurgent economy, and city leaders wish outsiders would, too. The company, of course, is Enron, and the men who will be on trial are its former top executives, Kenneth L. Lay and Jeffrey K. Skilling, who face various charges in the scandal that led to the company's collapse and tarred this city's reputation four years ago.
''As of today, it's as if Enron had never happened,'' said Joan Johnson, president of the Hotel and Lodging Association of Greater Houston, echoing the sentiment of many Houstonians. Ms. Johnson said hotel occupancy was high, even though about 3,000 hotel rooms had been added downtown since Enron's collapse.
But as jury selection starts on Monday, residents here will have to relive the Enron debacle, with the possibility that the trial will drag on over several months. Already, hotels near the federal courthouse have been receiving a flow of out-of-town journalists, perhaps adding to the strength of the city's lodging industry.
In preparation for the trial, city officials are trying to accentuate the positive. The Greater Houston Partnership, a business association, raised the idea of coaching bellhops and other hotel workers on how to put Houston's best face forward in the downtown hotels, where many journalists will be staying. It rejected the proposal and instead backed a plan to post media contacts and Internet links in hotel lobbies, with the aim of planting ideas for positive stories.
Have you heard, for example, that Bakersfield, Calif., has unhealthier air quality than Houston, or that Houston has 82 foreign consulates, the nation's third-largest consular corps? The partnership puts those tidbits and more at the disposal of visiting news media.
''It was devastating for Houston to have its image portrayed as a bunch of corporate gunslingers during the first Enron go-around,'' said John F. Thrash, chief executive of eCorp, a family-owned energy concern, and the husband of Becca Cason Thrash, the hostess of Houston's most extravagant high-society gatherings. ''That is something we're striving to overcome.''
It isn't just Enron. Some residents get the jitters over even the slightest negative publicity about Houston, its wildcatting business ethic, its no-zoning sprawl or its continuing battles with industrial pollution. This week there was an outcry over an oil-laden, caramel-colored fog that blanketed a poor neighborhood in the shadow of the city's largest refinery.
Of course, Houston has taken numerous additional hits since Enron's collapse in late 2001, when the symbol of outrage became a question at a company meeting from an anonymous Enron employee to Mr. Lay, the company's embattled chairman: ''Are you on crack?''
Thousands of well-paid Enron employees lost jobs, and the city's name was associated with schemes to hide losses from investors and destabilize the flow of electricity in California.
Back then, Houston was also criticized for its freewheeling approach to business. That shows few signs of fading. While not experiencing a boom as incandescent as past expansions, Houston's economy is still growing steadily, driven by inexpensive real estate, climbing energy prices and a fast-growing population.
"We're fine now, but the impact at the time was huge," said John Flowers, who owns Kenneally's Irish Pub near the exclusive River Oaks neighborhood. He recalls the Enron executives who used to drop by his smoky establishment for pints of Guinness as "free-spending individuals who made more money than God."
The city's economy has grown for 35 consecutive months, according to a monthly survey of purchasing executives conducted by the National Association of Purchasing Management-Houston. November, the most recent month for which statistics are available, was one of the strongest months in a decade, as demand rose for goods like plastic pipes and refined petroleum products.
Houston's status as an inland transportation hub with a ship channel to the Gulf of Mexico has also provided a buffer against the demise of Enron. Aided in part by the diversion of cargo from New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, revenue at the Port of Houston increased 13 percent last year and total tonnage grew by 9 percent, said H. Thomas Kornegay, executive director of the Port of Houston Authority.
Furthermore, jobs are being created in the Houston economy. Employers added 42,500 jobs in 2005 and 24,100 in 2004, according to the Texas Workforce Commission. This follows heavy job losses in 2002 and 2003.
Much of the job creation has been fueled by a growing service industry and a robust construction market expected to expand further this year, even as housing in other parts of the country loses steam amid deflation of the real estate bubble.
''If any other city lost the seventh-largest corporation in America, it would have had more impact,'' said Tilman J. Fertitta, chief executive of Landry's Restaurants, and one of a handful of Houston businessmen who have filled the void left by Mr. Lay's exit from the city's social scene.
''It's just a whole hell of a lot cheaper here than other cities,'' Mr. Fertitta, one of the largest holders of real estate in Houston and nearby Galveston, said in an interview. ''This is still an energy town but our prices have allowed us to become more diverse than in the 80's.''
Relatively low home prices, with three-bedroom homes still widely available for less than $200,000, are luring developers to erect entirely new cities on the prairies and rice fields that make up much of Houston's outer fringe. Cheap land pushed housing starts to a record high in 2005, when they climbed 18 percent, to 48,000, according to Metrostudy, a real estate consulting firm.
One new real estate venture, a planned community called Bridgeland that is being developed by General Growth Properties of Chicago, is projected to consist of 21,000 new homes over 10,000 acres, an area larger than Houston's entire existing inner core of skyscrapers, subdivisions and shopping districts.
This project and others are a bet that Houston's population will continue to climb. The Houston-Galveston Area Council, which represents the eight-county Houston area, forecasts an increase to 8.8 million residents by 2035, from 5.3 million today. Much of the growth is driven by immigrants from Latin America, Africa and Asia, who come here legally or illegally and stay for the same reason that 150,000 survivors of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita relocated to Houston last year: a warm welcome.
In contrast to other communities that have experienced successful movements against illegal immigrants, calls by anti-immigrant groups last year to start questioning residents about their citizenship status drew a chilly response from Mayor Bill White and police officials, who perceived such a measure as a diversion from preventing crime.
And in a decision that raised eyebrows throughout Texas, The Dallas Morning News on Jan. 1 named Houston its ''2005 Texan of the Year.'' The city beat out the filmmaker Robert Rodriguez, the cyclist Lance Armstrong and Ronnie Earle, the prosecutor who helped engineer the indictment of Representative Tom DeLay, the Republican who represents Houston's southern suburbs.
In an editorial that seemed a veiled criticism of political divisiveness in its hometown, The Morning News cited Houston's ''resilience, resourcefulness and good old Texas neighborliness on a scale that did the whole state proud.''
''The mountain came to Mohammed when Dallas tipped its hat at us that way,'' said Richard W. Murray, an influential pollster and political scientist at the University of Houston. ''We've come a long way since the boom 25 years ago, when people were raising cash with projections of $100 oil. No one's doing that now.''
Instead, Mr. Murray pointed out, there is a new sobriety and even, perhaps, the beginning of a sense that the benefits from the city's modest economic expansion need to spread out more equitably. For instance, the Service Employees International Union last month unionized 4,700 janitors in Houston, in one of the most successful unionization drives in the South in recent decades.
Not surprisingly, the most vibrant area of Houston's economy these days is energy, which is starting to hire after years of job cuts; oil and gas companies account for roughly 50 percent of economic activity here, down from higher levels as other industry grows more prominent.
So it may be fitting, as Houston tries to put to rest its association with Enron's hard-charging chiefs, that the last of the city's larger-than-life wildcatters are fading away or facing their own legal problems. Red Adair, the oil well firefighter, and Michel T. Halbouty, the geologist who cut his teeth in the east Texas oil fields, both died recently. And federal agents arrested the oilman Oscar S. Wyatt, 81, at his home several weeks ago on charges of paying millions of dollars in kickbacks to Saddam Hussein's regime.
	United States government officials said Friday that they had asked the owner of a hotel here, which is part of an American corporation, to expel a Cuban delegation that was meeting with American oil executives.
The delegation later left the hotel.
The request was made by the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control, which told Starwood Hotels, the owner of the Sheraton Maria Isabel in Mexico City, that American law prohibited it from supplying services to Cuban individuals or companies. The move is the latest in what seems be a hardening by the Bush administration of the trade embargo against Cuba.
A spokeswoman for the Treasury Department, Molly Millerwise, said, ''The hotel acted in accordance with U.S. sanctions.''
A spokeswoman for Starwood Hotels, Nadeen Ayala, confirmed that the Treasury Department had asked the hotel ''to have the Cuban nationals leave.''
Cuban officials are trying to court American petroleum companies to produce oil in the nation's territorial waters after succeeding in attracting exploratory investments from Chinese, Indian and Norwegian energy companies. The meeting of largely Texan oil executives and elite bureaucrats from Havana began Thursday and was to end Saturday.
''It's outrageous that I, as an American citizen, can't go and talk to someone on Mexican soil,'' said Kirby Jones, a former World Bank official and the organizer of the meeting for the U.S.-Cuba Trade Association, a nonprofit group in Washington.
Mr. Jones said this was the 10th meeting he had organized between American executives and Cuban officials, although it was the first to focus on opportunities for American energy companies in Cuba.
Previous meetings had resulted in sales of American food products to Cuba.
This week's meeting, Mr. Jones said, was originally scheduled for December in Cancún, Mexico, but was rescheduled for Mexico City.
Other meetings had been at hotels controlled by American companies, he said, including a hotel in Cancún, where the energy meeting was originally scheduled in December.
''This issue has never come up,'' Mr. Jones said. The American executives will try to meet with the Cubans at another location on Saturday.
Some of the largest American oil companies, including Exxon Mobil and the Valero Energy Corporation, had agreed to meet with Cuban officials on what was thought to be neutral ground at a hotel here in the cradle of Mexican capitalism, a short stroll on Paseo de la Reforma from a Starbucks, the United States Embassy and Mexico's stock exchange. The oil-importing Port of Corpus Christi and American shipping and oil field equipment companies also sent representatives.
''They're sensing a lost opportunity in their own backyard, less than 100 miles from the Florida coast,'' said Mr. Jones.
Although Cuba has suffered from energy shortages since the Soviet Union halted subsidized oil shipments more than a decade ago, its potential as an oil producer has caught attention.
According to the Energy Information Administration, Cuba's proven oil reserves of 750 million barrels exceed those of Sudan, an African nation that has lured large non-American investments to its oil industry despite American economic sanctions in place since 1997.
''We have absolutely no limitations on working with American oil companies. The barriers, unfortunately, come from the other side,'' said Alberto Wong Calvo, director of hydrocarbons at the National Office of Mineral Resources in Cuba.
Oil production in Cuba has surged since an opening to foreign investment in the 1990's, with operations by two Canadian companies, the Sherritt International Corporation and Pebercan Inc., helping to increase output to about 70,000 barrels a day in 2005 from a low of 18,000 barrels a day in 1992. Cuba consumes more than 150,000 barrels a day, with Venezuela providing imports on favorable financial terms.
The American economic embargo on dealings with Cuba prohibits energy companies from reaching exploration deals with Unión Cubapetróleo, Cuba's national oil company. But executives who attended the conference said they were encouraged by the recent relaxation of restrictions on American food exports to Cuba and the implications of Chinese rigs searching for oil this year in Cuban waters off the Straits of Florida.
''It's a difficult road ahead, but we're in the same neighborhood,'' said Amado Durón, director of operations at Valero Energy, the San Antonio-based refining company that could profit from processing Cuban oil at its refineries in Texas, Louisiana or the island of Aruba.
Cuba has been busy reaching exploration deals in the last year with Sinopec, the energy concern controlled by the Chinese government, ONGC Videsh of India and Norsk Hydro of Norway. So far, however, none of the ventures have found large fields like those in the American waters of the Gulf of Mexico.
Repsol of Spain spent $20 million on drilling that came tantalizingly close to a commercial discovery, but executives said oil from the field only partly met expectations. Petrobras of Brazil shelved Cuban exploration efforts after hitting a dry hole in 2001. Still, elevated oil prices have brought frontier plays like Cuba into play.
	Near this small Mennonite town carved out of the thick jungle, a farmer dug a shallow water well a few years ago and found a viscous black liquid seeping into the water. Given Belize's disappointing record of oil exploration, stretching back to its years under British rule, nearly everyone shrugged at the story except a stubborn Denver geologist.
Now Belize is the newest exporter of oil to the United States, a development that is starting to upend this small country of 280,000 people. A roughneck crew, backed by investors from Ireland and Colorado, struck oil in its first drilling attempt last year.
Their wells, dotting the dairy farms of German-speaking Mennonites who moved here a half-century ago from Canada and Mexico, are producing 2,000 barrels a day of oil similar in quality to the prized low-sulfur crude from the oil fields of West Texas.
''We need some help from fuel prices in this country, but people aren't too happy living near a smelly well,'' Jake Letkeman, the operator of the small Mennonite-controlled electricity plant here, said. ''We're waiting to see how this thing plays out.'' Much of Belize is on tenterhooks regarding the oil and its ramifications, but the small companies behind the discovery, Belize Natural Energy and CHX Energy of Denver, are reveling in their good fortune. Together with other independent companies that have recently struck oil and natural gas in locations once written off, including Paraguay, Syria and Uganda, these entrepreneurs are proving that wildcatting is alive and well.
As in Belize, the quantities of oil discovered in these places are relatively small, which partly explains why the largest and richest oil companies, Exxon Mobil, Chevron and Royal Dutch Shell, shun such gambles for larger so-called elephant projects with more promising returns.
But with oil fetching more than $60 a barrel on world markets, smaller companies are willing to risk just about everything these days in hopes of finding even tiny oil fields.
[Oil prices rose to $61.46 Monday in reaction to rebel attacks in Nigeria.]
''There were 50 dry wells drilled in Belize over 50 years until we came along,'' said Susan Morrice, a geologist from Denver. She is the wildcatter behind Belize Natural Energy, a venture she formed with the backing of her husband, the Colorado oil executive Alex Cranberg, and more than 70 small investors from her native Ireland. ''We simply felt we could not fail in our search for oil in such a promising, if neglected, country.''
Ms. Morrice's company has been remarkably swift in turning the discovery into cash. In January, Belize Natural Energy loaded 40,000 barrels onto a barge destined for a refinery in Houston, netting the company about $2 million.
With other wells planned in Spanish Lookout, it soon expects to be producing 5,000 barrels a day, and some geologists say Belize as a whole may one day produce 50,000 barrels a day.
That is a drop in the bucket compared with neighboring Mexico, where daily output is 3.4 million barrels a day. But it is significant for a small country on the margins of the global economy that has long scrounged for enough hard currency to import all its oil.
Belize imports about 5,000 barrels of oil a day, and gasoline costs nearly $5 a gallon. So the crude in Spanish Lookout has allowed this country to dream of energy independence.
Still, Belize, known as British Honduras until it was granted autonomy from Britain in 1981, faces some serious obstacles before it becomes anything resembling the Kuwait of Central America. About the same size as nearby El Salvador, it has only 4 percent of that country's population. It also has no refineries or pipelines and, unlike many developing countries, it has no national oil company or even an oil ministry.
But Belize does have a hidden asset in a civil servant, André Cho, who spends his time in a modest bungalow with linoleum floors and a screen door, in the capital city of Belmopan.
''I've been under a lot of stress lately, man,'' said Mr. Cho, 29, Belize's inspector of petroleum. The phone in Mr. Cho's office, which holds stacks of dog-eared copies of Oil & Gas Journal and British-era geological maps, has been ringing repeatedly in recent weeks with inquiries about drilling licenses from small American and European oil companies.
''We don't want to repeat the mistakes of other oil countries, like Nigeria,'' said Mr. Cho, wearing jeans and a gold earring. He said the government had recently approved his request to hire more staff geologists, as well as a former United Nations consultant from India who specializes in organizing the petroleum industries of poor nations.
Despite such moves and the formation in December of a government petroleum advisory board, there is considerable skepticism throughout Belize that the country can develop its oil resources without the corruption and environmental damage that afflict other poor oil-producing countries.
''If oil wealth brings millions, even billions, to Belize, who is to say that the wealth will not vanish just the same?'' Amandala, the country's largest-circulation newspaper, said in a recent editorial, citing a string of recent corruption scandals. In one report, government pension funds were said to have been used to pay the foreign obligations of a telecommunications start-up. ''Belizeans,'' the editorial said, ''need to keep their eyes on the oil and the money.''
Much of the tension around the oil discovery is focused on the 7.5 percent royalty that Belize Natural Energy is required to pay the government, which is much less than in other oil-producing countries. (Royalties to Norway for exploration in the North Sea, for instance, are more than 70 percent.)
Prime Minister Said W. Musa has said the royalty was kept low to provide a strong incentive for companies to explore in a country where oil had never been found before.
Sheila McCaffrey, a director in Belmopan of Belize Natural Energy, said the government would end up collecting overall taxes of about 30 percent on the oil. That includes the royalty and agreements that give the government a minority stake in the company, along with control of 10 percent of production from the oil wells.
The company is also trying to avoid ill will among Belizeans by channeling 1 percent of its revenue to a fund for protecting the country's fragile environment, which is about 40 percent jungle.
In Spanish Lookout, no one is waiting to find ways of profiting from the oil. The 1,400 Mennonites in the town still want a small share of the government's royalties to be transferred to them, but many are already using some of the low-sulfur oil by mixing it directly with diesel fuel in their small electricity plant, tractors and pickup trucks.
George Remple, the owner of Farmer's Choice Gas, said he had a steady stream of customers dropping in to buy the fuel, which he acquired from Belize Natural Energy for $1.60 a gallon and sold to customers for $1.80. ''As long as the engine isn't too computerized,'' he said, ''it runs fine.''
Oil here is low in impurities, or ''sweet'' in the parlance of the oil industry, making it relatively easy to process into fuel. So Belize Natural Energy, according to Ms. McCaffrey, plans to import a small plant that would enable it to produce diesel fuel from crude locally, which would alleviate the country's need to import some of its refined fuel.
On the drawing board as well, she said, was a project to use natural gas from the oil wells to fuel electricity plants, which might allow Belize to avoid costly and environmentally controversial hydroelectric dams. Other projects include a pipeline and an export terminal on thecoast.
These ambitious plans, though, hinge on a smooth political environment in Belize. The United States is transferring its embassy from hurricane-battered Belize City to Belmopan, the centrally planned capital in the interior, laid out by the British in the 1970's, that resembles a small Brasília. The American embassy complex, under construction, would dwarf the capital's other structures, including federal buildings designed along Mayan temple motifs.
The most acute political risk for Belize's nascent oil industry may be a long-festering territorial dispute with neighboring Guatemala, the most densely populated country in Central America and home to 12 million people. Guatemala waited until 1992 to recognize Belize's independence officially.
Generations of Guatemalans have been taught in school that ''Belice es nuestro,'' or ''Belize is ours,'' a slogan that might acquire new resonance if abundant oil is found in Belize.
Representatives of the two countries agreed this month to begin negotiations to resolve territorial claims, but areas of Belize where oil exploration is taking place or planned remain squarely in land still claimed by Guatemala. Spanish Lookout is just a 20-minute drive from the Guatemalan border, where migrants seeking available land, many of them Maya Indians, have settled.
Irma Uck, a shopkeeper at the border crossing of Benque Viejo del Carmen, and who said her father was Guatemalan, said the oil discovery would add to tension in the area.
''Guatemala has a little oil, but they want more,'' Ms. Uck, 52, said. ''Everyone here has heard that Belize now has oil.''
	