The devastating effects of the terrorist bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah federal building in Oklahoma City in 1995, which claimed 168 lives, prompted new design standards for making government buildings -- particularly those housing law enforcement and intelligence agencies -- less vulnerable to explosives.
But it was not until a year ago that a subcommittee of the Interagency Security Committee began trying to establish nationwide standards for 150 million square feet that the federal government leases from private landlords. This process has proved challenging because safety measures are costly, whether they involve giving up space so that a building can be set far back from the curb or hiring guards and installing electronic turnstiles to limit access.
Real estate industry representatives have met several times with federal officials during the past year to seek assurance that landlords will not have to foot the additional costs, which they say could make it impractical for them to lease space to government agencies. ''There could be a crisis in the private sector if the numbers don't work,'' said Ron Burton, the vice president for advocacy for the Building Owners and Managers Association International, a trade association with 18,900 members in North America. ''Our members are in the business of making a profit.''
Federal officials have been eager to mollify the industry. ''Whatever standards we adopt,'' said William Jenkins, the national realty services officer for the General Services Administration, ''if we require that these things be in the lease, the government will pay its fair share. We're not asking the private sector to absorb these costs.'' He said his agency, which oversees federal procurement practices, did not plan to terminate leases in buildings that do not offer deep setbacks or meet other standards.
Complicating matters is the fact that the Federal Protective Service, the security agency for federal tenants, has moved from the G.S.A. to the new Homeland Security Department, adding a layer of bureaucracy. Mr. Jenkins and Keith Hughes, an official of the Federal Protective Service who serves as executive director of the Interagency Security Committee, said in a recent telephone interview that they submitted proposed standards to the Office of Management and Budget several months ago but have not yet supplied the required cost estimates.
Some developers say they are incorporating security features into their new buildings as if the standards had already been imposed. Patriots Plaza, a million-square-foot project being developed by Trammell Crow in southwest Washington, is being billed as the first private speculative office complex that was designed specifically to meet post-Sept. 11 security standards. Thomas E. Finan, a Trammell Crow principal based in McLean, Va., said that while the collapse of the twin towers had refocused attention on building security, the engineering principles being applied stem from Oklahoma City because car bombs or other explosives were considered the most likely form of attack.
''Nobody is attempting to create an impenetrable envelope where you can't fly an airplane into a building,'' he said. In Washington, where building height is limited to 12 stories, an airplane attack on an office building is considered unlikely.
In building Patriots Plaza, Mr. Finan said, an effort was made to avoid repeating the mistake made by developers of data centers in the 1990's, who included so many refinements that the owners could never recover their investment. ''We're trying to hit the baseline fundamentals,'' he said. The first phase -- a $90 million, 12-story building with 280,000 square feet -- is under construction and is expected to be completed early next year.
A structural engineering technique known as ''progressive collapse avoidance'' is being applied to prevent the kind of pancaking that occurred after the World Trade Center was attacked. Window frames are being designed to accommodate the thickest blast-resistant glass. The entrance to the first building will be 30 feet from the curb, but setbacks for the other two could be expanded to 50 feet, if that is what the government requires. The building will be made of precast concrete reinforced with steel to withstand the pressures of an explosion.
The garages will look as if they are part of the buildings but will actually be separate hardened structures, so that if a bomb goes off underground, the impact will not be felt elsewhere in the building. Similarly, the lobby will be built to be ''expendable'' in the case of a blast, to confine casualties to that area.
Mr. Finan said these and other features had increased construction costs by 8 to 10 percent. But he said these costs had been offset by the fact that the land costs were low -- about $55 a square foot for the first phase, compared with $125 a foot in the East End, the downtown neighborhood east of the White House that has been experiencing a revival after years of neglect. Trammell Crow's equity partner in the project is Multi-Employer Property Trust, one of the country's largest pension plan investment funds.
In an effort to protect occupants from chemical or biological attacks, air intake equipment would be on the roof, as it is in most buildings here, Mr. Finan said. But he said much less was known about how to prevent death or injury from this type of attack than from an explosion.
As they wait for the new security standards to be announced, building owners and managers already have more than an inkling of what they are likely to entail.
In November 2002, before the decision was made to adopt nationwide guidelines, the General Services Administration drafted standards for Washington and its surrounding suburbs, where the federal government leases about 47.6 million square feet of space. Based on standards that were developed for the Department of Justice, the guidelines divide leases into four categories, depending on the number of employees in the building and the nature of the work being performed, and are more demanding for new construction than for existing buildings.
The strictest standards pertaining to setbacks, blast-resistant windows, and access control for entrances and parking lots would be applied to buildings with more than 450 employees. Classified as Level 4 buildings, they would generally be more than 150,000 square feet in size and likely to house law enforcement and intelligence agencies deemed to be at high risk of attack.
At the opposite end are Level 1 buildings with 10 or fewer employees who have little contact with the public. But a smaller building could fall into the Level 4 category if, for example, space was occupied by a day care center.
Landlords say they are concerned about who would pay for access control in buildings in which the government is not the only tenant. They say they are also worried about driving away desirable tenants -- law firms, in particular -- that might be loath to put up with additional layers of security and the possibility that older buildings will no longer be able to attract government tenants.
There is also the question of whether the new standards will tend to favor suburban office parks at the expense of urban buildings, said Roger Platt, a senior vice president of the Real Estate Roundtable, an advocacy organization for the major real estate companies.
An even more ticklish issue is whether the federal government would allow retail uses in buildings housing more sensitive agencies. Store owners, of course, are not likely to subject their customers to security checks. Mr. Jenkins of the G.S.A. acknowledged that a blanket ban on retail could cause havoc but said that there might be instances when it would be safest for an agency to be the only tenant in a particular building. ''We're not precluding retail,'' he said.
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
	After two decades in the same location -- a town house on 57th Street just west of Fifth Avenue -- Ascot Chang, a retailer of custom-made shirts that cost as much as $650, found itself facing an uncertain future. The building had a new owner and the store's $40,000-a-month lease was set to expire in 2007.
So, like an apartment dweller eager to break free from the risks of renting, Ascot Chang decided to buy its own storefront. Recently the company, which is based in Hong Kong, agreed to pay $4 million for 4,700 square feet of ground-floor space at the former Intercontinental Hotel on Central Park South. The hotel is being converted into residential units.
''It's the Chinese mentality,'' said Thomas Yu, the general manager of United States operations for Ascot Chang, which also owns its store in Beverly Hills. ''We'd rather own our own store so that we don't have to move all the time.'' The purchase is expected to be completed in May.
It is still relatively rare in this country for retailers other than big-box chains like Wal-Mart and Home Depot to own their real estate. But with the wave of conversions, especially in New York, developers who specialize in residential or office construction are increasingly carving out a separate condo for their ground-floor space and putting it on the market. Prices for these retail spaces -- usually sold as condos, but occasionally as co-ops -- are rising rapidly.
According to Real Capital Analytics, a New York real estate company that tracks transactions of $5 million or more, $1.2 billion worth of retail condos across the country were sold in 2004 and 2005 combined, compared with $120.8 million in 2002 and 2003. From 2001 to 2005, the average sales price rose from $441 a square foot to $995 a square foot, said Robert M. White Jr., the company president.
''I think the high pricing that's been achieved by some of these retail condos is going to cause more investors to look real hard at their retail space,'' Mr. White said. ''More of them will create retail condos and sell it off separately.''
Hessam Nadji, the managing director of research services for Marcus & Millichap, an investment brokerage company based in Encino, Calif., has identified about 250 retail condos on the market across the country. Of those aimed at retailers, rather than investors, the average asking price is about $285 a square foot, he said.
Brokers say that more of these properties are coming on the market. ''It used to be that developers would hold onto the retail when they converted the building,'' said James P. Nelson, a managing partner at Massey Knakal, an investment brokerage company that specializes in smaller New York properties, ''but now they see that when space is vacant, they can get a premium.''
Stephen L. Glascock, the president of Anbau Enterprises, the developer of 110 Central Park South where the Intercontinental once operated, said his investors had always planned to sell the retail space. ''We're not in the retail business,'' he said. ''We're in the business of residential development.''
Some sellers are seizing the moment. After holding onto 18,000 square feet of retail space with small neighborhood stores at 275 and 295 Greenwich Street in TriBeCa for nearly two decades, the Shaw Company of Chicago decided last year that it was time to sell, said Bruce Sinder, the president of Sinvin Realty, which represented Shaw.
A new project is rising across the street that will have a Whole Foods store, and several of the existing leases are about to expire, Mr. Sinder said. A company owned by the developer Donald Zucker bought the retail condo in December for $13.75 million. ''He was buying for the future,'' Mr. Sinder said.
Retail condos attract several types of buyers. Some seek to defer payment of capital gains by exchanging property of similar value under Section 1031 of the federal tax code, as the Shorenstein family of San Francisco did last year when it bought the Borders Books space on 57th Street and Park Avenue for an undisclosed price.
Others are foreign retailers, accustomed to owning real estate in their home countries. Parasuco Jeans, a Montreal company that sells jeans for $150 to $800, is about to open its first United States store in 6,000 square feet of ground-floor space in a former bank building at Spring and Lafayette Streets in SoHo.
''Why throw money away on rent if you can own the place?'' said Salvatore Parasuco, the chief executive of the company, which bought the store for $8.5 million from Leviev Boymelgreen, the developer that converted the rest of the building into residential condos. Some foreign retailers are so eager to acquire real estate that they are willing to become residential landlords or move to less-than-ideal locations. Custo Barcelona, an apparel chain based in Spain, recently bought a four-story building on Columbus Avenue and 71st Street with apartments on the three upper floors, said Joshua Strauss, a managing director at Robert K. Futterman & Associates, a retail brokerage company.
Custo Barcelona also owns a retail condo on Broome Street. ''Broome Street is not the best location,'' he said. ''You'd rather be on Broadway. But they still want to buy, and only buy.''
Most of the costliest retail condos, however, are being sold to real estate investors. One of the most active buyers is the publicly traded Vornado Realty Trust, which set a record -- $6,647 a square foot) -- last May when it paid $113 million for retail space in the former Westbury Hotel, a residential conversion on Madison Avenue at 69th Street, that is leased until 2018 by the luxury retailers Cartier and Gucci.
Even condos with less glamorous tenants are commanding high prices. Storefronts on Lexington Avenue and 59th Street that are leased to the Gap and Banana Republic recently sold for $2,800 a square foot.
Chain stores based in this country are not in the habit of owning their real estate, brokers say. ''Americans don't do it because it takes away capital they need to expand their business,'' said Alan Victor, an executive vice president of the Lansco Corporation, which represents tenants. ''Most would rather open another store and generate more revenue.''
One United States company that prefers owning to renting is Valley National Bank of Wayne, N.J., which has nine branches in Manhattan and four more set to open this year. Banks have been rapidly expanding in Manhattan, paying annual rents of $200 a square foot or more.
Gerald H. Lipkin, the chief executive of Valley National for the last 17 years, said he liked the predictability that goes along with ownership. ''If you own, you've locked in your fixed costs for eternity,'' he said. And what if the branch fails at that location? ''So I sell it,'' he said.
For the most part though, retailers who own their space tend to be local entrepreneurs, Mr. Nadji said.
Several years ago, Howard A. Ellins and his wife, Jocelyn Serfaty, decided to turn a longtime interest in Asian antiques into a retail business. It took two years for them to find a retail condo in the right location for their store, Abhaya Home Furnishings, but eventually they bought a 5,000-square-foot space at 145 Hudson Street in TriBeCa for $1.8 million.
Had they rented space, the lease would have expired in a few years, forcing them to confront the higher rents that have accompanied the neighborhood's escalating residential prices, said Mr. Ellins, who retired this year as a litigator at Davis Polk & Wardwell. ''This was the more sensible way for us to go at it,'' he said.
Square Feet
	CenterPoint Properties Trust, a leading developer of industrial property, has burnished its image over the last few years by transforming a former weapons factory in the Chicago suburb of Elwood into a successful intermodal railroad and warehouse complex.
CenterPoint had been a publicly traded real estate investment trust since 1993, but its solid reputation was not reflected in its share price. Analysts fretted when the company tried to spread its wings beyond its home base of Chicago. The sudden dismissal last year of a top executive also dragged down the stock.
Fortunately for CenterPoint, executives at the California Public Employees' Retirement System, or CalPers, the nation's largest pension fund, saw things differently. CalPers, a joint venture partner with CenterPoint for the last five years, liked the company's plan to build additional intermodal centers -- where shipping containers from around the world are transferred from long freight trains to shorter trains or trucks. CalPers also had great confidence in CenterPoint's management, said José McNeil, who manages the pension fund's industrial portfolio.
So last fall, CalEast Industrial Investors, a joint venture between CalPers and LaSalle Investment Management, a division of Chicago-based Jones Lang LaSalle that invests in real estate for pension funds and other institutional investors, made the kind of move that is occurring with increasing frequency. It bought CenterPoint for $3.4 billion, or $50 a share. The sale, representing a 13.1 percent premium above the average stock price over the three months before the deal was announced on Dec. 9, was completed last week.
Since 2004, 12 real estate investment trusts, or REIT's, representing all commercial property sectors -- office, industrial, retail, hotels and apartments -- have been acquired by private companies, and two other buyout offers are pending, both involving the Blackstone Group, a private equity firm in New York. Last week, Blackstone agreed to buy the CarrAmerica Realty Corporation, a large national office REIT based in Washington, for $5.6 billion, the richest price so far. Shareholders are expected to approve the deal this summer.
Real estate specialists say more REIT's can be expected to go private as long as interest rates remain low, investors are flush with capital and private buyers and Wall Street analysts have disparate views of how much the underlying real estate is worth. ''I think it will continue as long as the stocks are cheap,'' said James S. Corl, the chief investment officer for real estate at Cohen & Steers, CarrAmerica's largest shareholder.
As many as 10 other deals may be in the pipeline, said Richard D. Kincaid, the chief executive of Equity Office Properties Trust, a REIT based in Chicago that is almost certain to remain public because of its enormous size; it has interests in 615 office buildings, with 111.1 million square feet.
Jonathan L. Mechanic, the chairman of the real estate practice at Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson, said his firm was working on at least four possible deals.
The announcement by Town and Country Trust, an apartment REIT based in Baltimore, that it had accepted a buyout offer from an investor group made up of Morgan Stanley Real Estate and the Onex Corporation of Canada, unleashed a bidding war with two other suitors. Shareholders approved the deal with Morgan Stanley last week, but not before the bid was raised from $33.90 a share to $40.20 a share.
All this activity has helped to drive up share prices, even for REIT's that are not considered acquisition targets. ''The stocks are up another percent today,'' Chandler Spears, the portfolio manager for Davis Real Estate Fund of Santa Fe, a major shareholder in CenterPoint and other REIT stocks, said last week. ''It's almost getting a bit comical. It's like tech mania has hit REIT-land.''
Since Dec. 31, REIT shares have risen 11.6 percent, according to Keven Lindemann, the director of real estate for SNL Financial, a research company based in Charlottesville, Va. Helping to spur the privatization trend is the widespread availability of debt financing, giving private buyers an advantage over public companies, which have traditionally limited their borrowing. ''There isn't a lot of precedent for highly leveraged REIT's,'' said Cameron W. Clough, a managing director of North American banking for Morgan Stanley Real Estate, which advised CalEast on the CenterPoint deal. ''The market would have a little trouble accepting it.''
Blackstone, for example, is under no such constraints. The firm will borrow $4.25 billion to complete its purchase of CarrAmerica, the REIT said last week in a document filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Blackstone declined to discuss its plans for CarrAmerica, which has buildings in two of the strongest office markets, Washington and Southern California, but is also well represented in Northern California, a market that has yet to recover from the technology bust.
Mr. Kincaid, the Equity Office chief executive, however, speculated that Blackstone would sell CarrAmerica's trophy assets while holding onto its buildings in the Silicon Valley and San Francisco in anticipation of improvement in those markets.
At CenterPoint, the company president, Paul S. Fisher, said he was relieved to be free of the requirements of being a public company, including the more stringent accounting practices imposed by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, which he described as a distraction. As a public company, CenterPoint had to disclose information before a transaction was completed, giving its competitors an advantage, Mr. Fisher said.
In addition, he and Michael M. Mullen, the chief executive, had to spend too much of their time explaining their business to Wall Street, Mr. Fisher said. ''I'm now back doing transactions,'' he said.
But Dale Anne Reiss, who directs the global real estate practice at Ernst & Young, said that the availability of information had helped give the commercial real estate industry credibility. ''That's one of the things that's helped create the value in real estate,'' she said. ''Were we to lose that -- over a period of time, it could impact the values.''
SQUARE FEET
	At 85, but looking at least a decade younger, Stanley Whitman still plays tennis and comes to work almost every day. His son, Randall, 60, is only half-kidding when he introduces himself as ''the world's oldest boss's son.''
Together, father and son operate the 500,000-square-foot Bal Harbour Shops, an open-air luxury mall lined with palm trees and fountains in a narrow enclave just north of Miami Beach. Founded by the elder Mr. Whitman in 1965, the shopping center, one of only a handful of family-owned malls across the country, is considered a retailing phenomenon.
Sales per square foot in 2003 (excluding the anchor stores, Neiman Marcus and Saks Fifth Avenue) were not what they were before the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, but were still nearly four times the national average, the Whitmans say. Even on weeknights, the restaurants at Bal Harbour are jammed with fashionably dressed patrons, many of them foreign tourists carrying shopping bags with designer logos.
For nearly four decades, the Whitmans, who own no other retail property, have had the luxury market in Miami-Dade County virtually to themselves. But the mall is facing a challenge from a new 700,000-square-foot shopping center that opened in September 2002 in Coral Gables, about 14 miles south of Bal Harbour.
The new mall was built on a former industrial site by the Rouse Company, a real estate developer based in Columbia, Md., as part of the Village of Merrick Park, a $275 million project. The mixed-use Mediterranean-style development has the county's second Neiman Marcus (130,000 square feet, compared with 90,000 square feet at Bal Harbour), a 200,000-square-foot Nordstrom that is the chain's first store in either Miami-Dade or Broward County, and about 100 stores, 39 of them luxury, including several, like Gucci, Roberto Cavalli and Tiffany, that are also represented at Bal Harbour.
Rouse officials say the high-end stores, which occupy the first of three levels, are doing well, but they acknowledge that over all, the mall is off to a slower start than anticipated. Duke S. Kassolis, an executive vice president, blamed a decline in tourism, the economic slowdown and the fact that two of the major restaurants had not yet opened. The mall, expected to earn an 11.2 percent return on investment, has been yielding in the range of 7 percent, he said.
The Whitmans are tough-minded executives who are known for casting out underperforming retailers, among them Chico's, the clothing store chain that caters to women over 35, which now has a store at Merrick Park. But the Whitmans say their family pride was wounded when the Rouse Company filed an antitrust lawsuit against them. The suit sought to overturn Bal Harbour Shops' unusually far-reaching radius restriction, which allowed the shopping center to impose a financial penalty on tenants that opened a second store in either Miami-Dade or Broward County.
''We've had competition before,'' the elder Mr. Whitman said. ''The only significant difference with Merrick Park is that they announced they were coming in to take over our position. No one else has done that.'' In a settlement reached in 2002, which both sides are barred from discussing, Bal Harbour Shops agreed not to apply its clause to prospective tenants at Merrick Park.
Mr. Kassolis, however, said that the Miami area, with a population of more than 2.2 million, was now big enough to support more than one luxury mall. ''Bal Harbour is a great project,'' he said, ''and no less of a great project than it was before we came to Coral Gables. We have the utmost respect for the Whitmans and what they've accomplished.'' He said Merrick Park saw itself as ''a little more fashion-forward'' and was aiming for a younger customer than Bal Harbour's.
James J. Walsh, a retail specialist in Miami for Cushman & Wakefield, said that despite Merrick Park's slow start, it would probably take some customers away from Bal Harbour, particularly those who live in downtown Miami or farther south. ''It's going to impact them to some degree,'' he said. ''Some people will say, 'Why should I drive all the way up to Bal Harbour when I'm so much closer to Merrick Park?'''
When Stanley Whitman decided in the 1950's to build a mall on the site of a former Army barracks on Collins Avenue, within a block of both the Atlantic Ocean and Biscayne Bay, Miami Beach was deteriorating badly and upscale department stores like Bonwit Teller had fled the main shopping street, Lincoln Road.
Mr. Whitman, whose family owned the art deco Whitman Hotel, now closed, had ideas that seemed outlandish, like charging a parking fee. In a period when enclosed malls were popular, he placed his shopping center in a gardenlike setting and even planted palm trees in the parking lot, to the irritation of some tenants. ''Everybody, including my own family, wanted to put me in a nuthouse,'' Mr. Whitman recalled.
Mr. Whitman took several other steps that were risky for the 1960's. He opened a fashion-oriented mall without anchor stores or even a supermarket or drugstore, and he charged much higher rent than other mall operators. He said it took him years to persuade Neiman Marcus to open its first store outside Texas at Bal Harbour; it was quickly expanded by 30,000 square feet. In 1983, the Whitmans opened a second level, but they say they will never add a third.
''Stanley Whitman,'' said Steven B. Greenberg, the president of the Greenberg Group, a retail real estate consulting company based in Hewlett, N.Y., ''was light-years ahead of his time. He envisioned a Madison Avenue lineup. He went out and got the best tenants. They know quality when they see it, and they are entrepreneurial enough that when the next Prada comes along, they respond.''
Recent additions to Bal Harbour include Lalique, Valentino, Yves Saint Laurent Rive Gauche, Gianfranco Ferré, Paul&Shark, Francesca Romana and Cole Haan.
Bal Harbour charges modest annual rents by Madison Avenue standards -- roughly $100 a square foot for ground-floor space and $70 on the second level, where the tenants include some decidedly nonluxury retailers like Banana Republic and the Gap. (The average mall tenant pays $30 a square foot, said Greg Andrews, a retail REIT analyst for Green Street Advisers, an independent investment research company in Newport Beach, Calif.) But retailers also pay a percentage of their sales, a sum that tends to be much higher than the base rent, Mr. Greenberg said. (Leases at Merrick Park range from $40 to $80, depending on the shop size and when the tenant signed up, and include a percentage of sales, said Mr. Greenberg, who has placed tenants there.)
Sales at Bal Harbour Shops have declined since 2000, when they reached $1,350 a square foot, the Whitmans say. Even so, the mall's sales per square foot were the highest in the nation in 2002, according to the Greenberg Group's annual survey of the top 25 malls, and in 2003 reached $1,170, Randall Whitman said. The national average for 2002, the latest available, was $330, according to the International Council of Shopping Centers, a trade group.
Real estate specialists say that the mall's private ownership enables the Whitmans to act in ways that would be unheard-of for public companies, which are under constant pressure from stockholders. For example, one tenant, Bonwit Teller, went out of business more than a decade ago, but some of its 60,000 square feet was unoccupied until recently because the younger Mr. Whitman hoped -- vainly, as it turned out -- to lure Barneys New York to Bal Harbour.
The Whitmans attribute their success to their stable, hands-on management and long-term employees and say they were never tempted to try to clone Bal Harbour elsewhere. ''I didn't see any thrill in doing it over and over,'' Stanley Whitman said.
These days, he said, he devotes his time mainly to strategic planning. Recently, he tried to bring a movie theater to the mall but said that he abandoned the idea because the construction costs would have been too high.
But Randall Whitman said there was no question about who was actually in charge. Recently, the son said, his father rejected a suggestion from him in no uncertain terms. ''I laughed,'' the younger Mr. Whitman said, ''and that was the end of that. It's not easy working for your dad.''
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE  Correction:  January 22, 2004, Thursday  A picture caption in Business Day yesterday about the owners of Bal Harbour Shops, a luxury mall in Florida, misidentified the man at the right. He was Randall Whitman, managing partner of the mall and the son of its founder -- not Matthew Lazenby, a grandson.
	Once you could find them every few blocks or so in prime neighborhoods of Manhattan, but these days the local chain supermarket seems to be heading the way of the five-and-dime. Among the latest casualties is a D'Agostino market on University Place near Union Square, which is closing after two decades in that location.
The last A.& P. in Manhattan, at 70th Street and West End Avenue, shut its doors in January. Gristedes, which has 39 supermarkets in Manhattan, gave up a store it has had for 30 years at 62nd Street and Second Avenue after being outbid by Chase Bank, said John A. Catsimatidis, chief executive of the chain.
''If you look at the previous 10 years,'' Mr. Catsimatidis said, ''you have 50 percent fewer supermarkets than you had then, and going forward 10 years the number will probably halve again.''
New Yorkers are not exactly going hungry, but their shopping habits have changed. These days, apartment dwellers are likely to find themselves walking a bit farther than they used to, buying meat and produce in one place and staples in another. Many supermarkets that once occupied 6,000 to 10,000 square feet have been replaced by chain drugstores that also carry paper towels and cereal, often at lower prices.
In Manhattan, the number of food stores that are 5,000 square feet or larger has actually grown in the last decade, to 196 from 154, because markets are turning up in neighborhoods that were previously underserved, according to Lawrence Sarf, the president of F&D Reports, a retail consulting company in Great Neck, N.Y. But, he said, the proportion of markets on the Upper West Side, Upper East Side and Midtown had declined to about 30 percent of the total, from 70 percent.
Escalating rents, especially in prime Manhattan neighborhoods, are helping to drive out traditional supermarkets. On Third Avenue and Broadway, banks -- Commerce Bank, Washington Mutual and Wachovia, among others -- are willing to pay $250 a square foot a year or more for storefronts that once commanded a fraction of that rent.
''This last deluge of bank expansions has escalated value of retail space, almost everywhere, way past what a normal retailer can pay,'' said C. Bradley Mendelson, an executive director at Cushman & Wakefield.
Supermarkets are a low-margin business, in part because a large proportion of their stock consists of perishable goods. A decade or so ago, a supermarket would pay an amount equivalent to 2 percent of its sales in rent in affluent neighborhoods, Mr. Catsimatidis said. Now, it has to pay as much as 8 percent of sales, he said. To hold onto a store on University Place and Eighth Street, Mr. Catsimatidis said, he had to agree to twice the previous rent.
One small supermarket chain, Morton Williams Associated Markets, would like to expand -- the company has 10 New York stores, 8 of them in Manhattan -- but has been unable to find space it can afford, said Morton Sloan, one of the owners.
Food City Markets once had six stores in Manhattan and is now down to one, at Columbus Avenue and 94th Street. ''When a supermarket decides to pay big rents, they've got to get big prices in the store,'' said Jeffrey L. Berger, the chief executive of Food City, which has two stores outside Manhattan. ''The customers don't understand. You don't make any friends.'' High rents, however, are not the sole reason traditional supermarkets are disappearing.
Supermarkets are having a tough time everywhere. In the suburbs, they are being squeezed by competition from discount retailers like Wal-Mart. In New York, particularly Manhattan, much of the pressure is coming from the opposite direction -- upscale markets like Whole Foods Market and Citarella that cater to less price-conscious customers and carry a large selection of prepared foods, which can be marked up higher, making them more profitable for store owners.
''You're dealing with a city with an incredibly large affluent population that can afford to shop on a regular basis at specialty shops,'' said Benjamin Fox, an executive vice president at the real estate firm Newmark Knight Frank.
In contrast to the older chains, most of these specialty shops employ nonunion labor. Pat Purcell, the director of organization for the United Food and Commercial Workers Union Local 1500, which has 23,000 New York area members, said that as specialty stores had come to play a more important role, the proportion of unionized supermarket employees had declined to about 50 percent, from 70 percent a decade ago.
Many Manhattan customers have been all too willing to desert their local supermarket, with its narrow aisles cluttered with cartons, dirty floors and indifferent service, retail specialists say.
''The supermarkets have been inferior for decades,'' said Burt P. Flickinger III, the managing director of Strategic Resource Group, a retail consulting group.
Often, co-op boards and developers would prefer to have a gourmet store as a tenant, or, better still, a retailer outside the food industry. ''The buildings don't want the vermin; they'd rather have a drugstore,'' said Jeff Winick, the chief executive of the Winick Realty Group, a brokerage company that has represented Duane Reade in about 250 lease transactions in the last 10 years.
FreshDirect, the online grocery service, has also made a big impact in the New York area since it opened its Long Island City plant in 2002. The company has about 150,000 customers and takes in about $200 million a year -- as much as 80 percent of it coming from Manhattan, a spokeswoman said.
''FreshDirect is putting a dent into everybody -- a big dent,'' Mr. Sarf said. He estimated that Manhattan grocery shoppers spend $2.1 billion a year.
Some supermarket chains, like Mr. Sloan's, are trying to compete with the gourmet stores by offering more takeout food. A.& P. recently announced plans to upgrade its 16 Food Emporium stores in Manhattan.
A.& P. officials did not respond to requests for an interview. But at a March 1 investors' meeting sponsored by CIBC, Christian W. E. Haub, the executive chairman of the Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company, said the new Food Emporium concept was designed ''to really attract the kind of consumer who does not care about price, where it's all about quality and service.''
One particularly challenging location for Food Emporium and other conventional supermarkets is Union Square, where the competition includes the city's premier Greenmarket, a Whole Foods store, a Garden of Eden market and the city's first Trader Joe's. Even before the arrival of Whole Foods, the D'Agostino market that occupies 6,000 square feet in a four-story commercial building at 64 University Place, three blocks from Union Square, was not successful, according to the landlord, Bernard Posner.
Mr. Posner, an owner of Bernard-Charles Realty, said the supermarket's rent was $84.70 a square foot plus a percentage of earnings over $15 million. ''They never reached that amount,'' he said.
Nicholas D'Agostino III, the chief executive of the third-generation family business, declined to comment.
Now that D'Agostino is leaving, Mr. Posner said he had raised the asking rent to $135 a square foot. He said he hoped the next tenant would be another supermarket or an upscale restaurant.
''We may end up with a chain drugstore,'' he said, ''but we'll try to avoid it if we can.''
Square Feet
	Investors in Australia, a country with a population slightly larger than that of New York State, acquired $2.4 billion worth of real estate in the United States last year, more than foreign investors from any country but Germany.
The Australian investment, while amounting to only a fraction of the $114 billion worth of American real estate that changed hands last year, represented a threefold increase from 2002 and was substantially larger than the direct investment from all other countries combined if Germany and the Middle Eastern countries are excluded, said Robert M. White Jr., the president of Real Capital Analytics, a New York research company that tracks sales of $5 million or more.
He said German investors bought $3.6 billion in American property last year, down from $4.4 billion in 2002.
The Australians have not been amassing trophy assets, unlike Japanese investors, who snapped up high-profile properties like Rockefeller Center in Manhattan and the Pebble Beach Golf Course in California in the 1980's and early 1990's (giving up control of the office complex, then bankrupt, in 1996 and selling the golf course in 1999). Nor have the Australians been buying property on their own. Instead, they have been entering into joint ventures with American companies and mostly making decidedly unglamorous investments in shopping centers anchored by supermarkets or drugstores and in industrial buildings.
About 80 percent of the money has been invested in retail space, Mr. White said.
For the most part, said Barry Vinocur, the editor of Realty Stock Review, a newsletter that focuses on REIT stocks, the Australians are buying stable properties, allowing American companies to diversify their sources of capital and providing funds that they can use for other investments with a higher short-term potential.
The American companies earn fees for managing the properties and get incentives for making them more profitable. ''Those of us who follow REIT's,'' Mr. Vinocur said, ''see this as a very significant trend.''
Taking the lead has been Macquarie Bank, the international investment bank based in Sydney. Since 2001, Macquarie has been forming relationships with companies like the Regency Centers Corporation of Jacksonville, Fla., the nation's largest developer of strip malls anchored by grocery stores, and ProLogis, a major developer of distribution centers, and creating property trusts listed on the Australian securities market.
Currently, the property trusts operated by Macquarie have a real estate portfolio in North America valued at $2.1 billion, said Mark W. Baillie, the head of real estate for North America.
In its largest deal so far, Macquarie acquired an 81 percent interest in a $730 million portfolio of shopping centers around the United States that are owned or co-owned by Developers Diversified Realty Trustof Cleveland.
Last month, Brandywine Realty Trust, a REIT based in Plymouth Meeting, Pa., that owns and manages office and industrial property, announced that it was selling an 80 percent interest in two office buildings in Wilmington, Del., to Macquarie Office Trust for $112.8 million. The companies said the buildings are fully leased.
In general, however, Australian companies have shied away from office properties because of the high vacancy rate. ''The Australian market has been quite negative on office,'' said Mark Steinert, manager of global real estate research for UBS in Sydney.
In another recent deal, CBL & Associates Properties, a mall developer and manager based in Chattanooga, Tenn., announced the formation of a $387 million joint venture with Galileo America Shopping Trust, of Australia. When completed, the deal will give Galileo a 90 percent interest in 51 of CBL's big-box shopping centers and strip malls.
Following a different model, an Australian company, the Centro Properties Group, teamed with Watt Commercial Properties, a private real estate management and development company in Santa Monica, Calif., to buy a $488 million portfolio of 14 shopping centers across California, ranging in size from the 91,156-square-foot University Mall in Davis to the 411,726-square-foot Mira Mesa Mall in San Diego. As a result of the transaction, Watt's holdings doubled from three million square feet to six million, and the company hired 30 additional people, said Jim Maginn, the president and chief executive.
What has fueled the current investment wave, Australian real estate specialists say, is a retirement savings program known as the superannuation guarantee levy, which took effect in 1992. Similar to the 401(k) benefit in the United States, the program requires employers to contribute 9 percent (up from 3 percent at the outset) of a worker's wages to a retirement fund, an amount equal to about $30 billion a year, according to Mr. Steinert. Australian workers seeking safe investments have fewer options than American workers -- Australia has a relatively undeveloped corporate bond market; so, many people have chosen to put their money into real estate.
At the same time, Australia's listed property trusts, its version of publicly traded real estate investment trusts, have grown in number and now control about $38.8 billion in assets, including more than half the investment-quality real estate in the country, and account for about 8 percent of all the equity market, Mr. Baillie said.
With the Australian population growing very slowly (and occupying a mere 15 percent of the land mass), the pace of development is slow and real estate prices are high. What is driving investors to look oversees, said Tony Cooper, a partner on the Australian tax desk at Ernst & Young in New York, ''is the fact that without the type of expansion you get with a wave of immigration, you're not going to get the growth of infrastructure to give you places to invest cash.'' Consequently, of Australia's $77 billion worth of real estate investment, about $20 billion has gone overseas.
The United States is preferred to Europe or Asia for several reasons, the real estate specialists say, including the favorable tax treatment resulting from a treaty between Australia and the United States, the cultural compatibility of the countries, similar expectations about initial rates of return and the current low interest rates.
The Dutch and British, who once led the roster of investors, are continuing to pour money into United States real estate, said Mr. White of Real Capital Analytics, but they are investing in REIT's or commercial-mortgage-backed securities rather than individual properties or portfolios. In 2002, Rodamco, a real estate company based in the Netherlands, demonstrated the shift in strategy by selling its portfolio of shopping centers in the United States for $5.3 billion.
One buyer was Westfield America Trust, an Australian company that entered the American market in 1977 by acquiring a shopping center in Trumbull, Conn. Westfield owns 66 malls in the United States, generating more than $14 billion in annual sales.
But by forming partnerships, the newer Australian investors are not following the model of Westfield, a global owner and operator, nor that of Lend Lease, another huge Australian company whose American operations were once valued at $1 billion. (Lend Lease has sold many of these businesses in recent months.)
Greg Andrews, a retail REIT analyst for Green Street Advisers, an independent research company, said the Australian investors chose their partners well. ''These are companies that have proved their acumen,'' he said, adding that the joint ventures have been good for the REIT's ''It's a relatively inexpensive source of capital,'' he said, ''and for keeping a relatively little amount of equity, the REIT can retain control and earn fees.''
But reception in Australia to the limited property trusts with American real estate portfolios has been mixed, and no trades are currently in the pipeline, according to Mr. White.
Michael Baliva, the vice president of American operations for Centro Properties, said, ''The Australian market is waiting to digest and understand and insure that the recent deals will perform well.''
One problem has been the weak American dollar, but Terry Fanous, a vice president and senior credit officer at Moody's Investors Service in Sydney, said that the Australian property trusts have taken steps to avoid leaving themselves exposed to currency volatility. ''Our view is that they have been prudent in pursuing these strategies,'' he said.
Mr. Steinert, however, said that if the dollar remained weak, future investment might be curtailed somewhat. ''There will be continued investment but at a slower rate,'' he said. ''But it is an increased appetite, and it is not fly by night.''
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
	