Given the disturbing level of animosity between the West and much of the Islamic world, can increased appreciation of Islamic art in the West help bridge the cultural divide? Is that notion overly optimistic? Perhaps. But since the shock of Sept. 11, 2001, interest in understanding the Islamic world through its art has been growing.
Certainly, with all the tension caused by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the war in Iraq, Al Qaeda and Muslim migration to Europe, probably nothing separates the West and the Islamic world more than cultural misunderstanding. This may not be new, but it can no longer be ignored. And it is too much to expect ''public diplomacy,'' today's euphemism for cultural propaganda, to provide a quick fix.
Instead, a case is being made for the benefits of promoting Islamic art in the West: the Islamic world would feel that its heritage was admired in countries that increasingly link Islam with terrorism; Westerners could look beyond today's turmoil to recognize one of the world's great civilizations; and alienated Muslim youths in Europe could identify with the glories of their Islamic roots.
Thanks to 19th-century explorers and travelers, fine Islamic art collections are plentiful in the West. The Pergamon Museum in Berlin, for instance, has housed a Museum of Islamic Art for more than a century. Yet all too often Islamic art has been hard to find in museums; invariably, it is treated as a poor relative of Egyptian, Greek and Roman antiquities.
Now, troubled times are changing this.
In 2002 President Jacques Chirac of France proposed creating a new department of Islamic art in the Louvre to underline ''the essential contribution of Islamic civilizations to our culture.'' Recently, the Louvre announced that a large courtyard would be covered in glass and redesigned to house its Islamic collection, now in underground corridors. The project will cost $60 million and take five years to complete.
''Obviously, this has a political dimension,'' said the minister of culture, Jean-Jacques Aillagon. ''It's a way of saying we believe in the equality of civilizations.'' He added: ''Many immigrant youths do not fully adhere to our culture, nor do they know their own culture of origin. It's good to show that the republic respects, displays and studies this culture.''
In London, the Victoria and Albert Museum will present its rich Islamic collection in a spectacular new gallery by 2006, thanks to a $9.7 million gift from Mohammed Jameel, the president of a Saudi business conglomerate. Announcing the gift two months ago, Mr. Jameel said one of his family's objectives was to increase understanding of the Islamic world.
Mark Jones, the director of the Victoria and Albert, said the new Jameel Gallery of Islamic Art would highlight the diversity of world culture. ''Do we want to confront prejudice?'' he asked. ''Yes, we want to undermine negative attitudes that people bring with them. It's absurd for some people to claim that Islamic culture is a barbaric culture. If you see what there is here, you can't possibly think it is hostile to beauty or education and has no intellectual tradition.''
While work is under way, the Victoria and Albert will do its own proselytizing by lending 100 of its prized Islamic objects for temporary exhibition at the National Gallery in Washington, the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, the Setagaya Art Museum in Tokyo and the Millennium Galleries in Sheffield, England. Meanwhile, ''Heaven on Earth: Art From Islamic Lands,'' which presents 60 treasures from the State Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg, Russia, and the Nasser D. Khalili Collection of Islamic Art, is on display at the Hermitage's London home in Somerset House through Aug. 22.
Temporary shows often create a special buzz. That was the case with ''Islamic Art and Patronage'' from the private collection of Sheik Nasser Sabah al-Ahmed al-Sabah and his wife, Sheika Hussah Sabah al-Salim al-Sabah, who are members of the Kuwaiti royal family. The show traveled to 22 sites around the world and drew large crowds.
''I'd see a man with a long beard standing next to an elegant lady, sharing a moment,'' Sheika Hussah said. ''Maybe through art we can bring people together.''
In New York, the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Islamic galleries are closed for renovation. ''Given the present geopolitical situation and increased public interest in Islamic art, this is an unfortunate moment to announce the temporary closing of the Islamic Galleries,'' Philippe de Montebello, the museum's director, conceded last year. But the result, he said, will be to show this art ''side-by-side with related works from other cultures.''
Like the Louvre and the Victoria and Albert, then, the Met intends to place Islamic art within the context of universal culture. This in turn will help illustrate the influence of Islamic art on architecture and design in the West, most noticeably in the 19th century.
Some museums, though, have chosen to focus exclusively on Islamic art. One highlight is the new Benaki Museum of Islamic Art in Athens. It is to open in two renovated 19th-century houses in June, in time for the Summer Olympics, displaying an Islamic collection built up by Antonis Benakis in the early 20th century, at the same time that he was building up a treasury of Greek antiquities. ''Greece has always had relations with the Arab world, and it's important to know its art,'' said Mina Moraitou, the collection's curator. ''Islamic art can show the beauty of its art, language and literature, that Islamic religion is not only about jihad.''
Yet the new interest in Islamic art within the Islamic world is just as important. Cairo and Istanbul have long boasted excellent collections, but a new Museum of Islamic Art, designed by I. M. Pei, is being built in Doha, Qatar. Due to open in 2006, it is the brainchild of Sheik Saud Ibn Muhammad Al Thani, chairman of the National Council of Arts and Heritage, who has been building up Qatar's collection since the mid-1990's.
Oliver Watson, the collection's curator, who is on loan from the Victoria and Albert, underscored the relationship between artistic heritage and the current climate. ''People say that at this moment it is more important to recognize that the Middle East and the Islamic world was in its day as advanced culturally, as well as economically and militarily, as any country or empire in the world,'' he said. Mr. Jones, the Victoria and Albert's director, put it more simply: ''It's no coincidence that people are more interested in Islamic art than ever.''
An Essay
	From the start of the prolonged offstage drama that has been convulsing Berlin's opera world since the late 1990's, two inescapable and contradictory realities seemed likely to determine the outcome. Financially, the city government could no longer afford to maintain three opera houses in the style to which they had become accustomed. Politically, it could not afford to close any of them.
The solution that has now been imposed by the Berlin Senate, amid squeals of dismay and sighs of resignation, was predictable. The three opera houses -- the Deutsche Staatsoper Unter den Linden, the Deutsche Oper and the Komische Oper -- will remain open, but they must cut costs, including 220 jobs, and learn to live on smaller subsidies. They are also to share workshops, and will shortly merge their three ballet companies into a single Staatsballett Berlin.
''We are starting a new chapter,'' said Georg Vierthaler, the Staatsoper's managing director, in an interview last month. ''In time we will see if it is a comedy, drama or tragedy.''
With the German economy in a slump, traditionally generous cultural subsidies are being trimmed across the country. Berlin's situation, though, is special. During the cold war, governments on both sides of the divided city promoted culture for propaganda purposes. After 1990, a united Berlin inherited three opera houses, eight orchestras and 17 theaters, but it lost many of its financial privileges.
As its budget deficit mounted through the 1990's, the city's coddled opera houses became targets for austerity measures. The opera managements protested, with the Staatsoper's music director, Daniel Barenboim, threatening to resign. But dependent on city government subsidies for $142 million of their collective $196 million annual budget, the houses could not elude political pressure.
And as they came under the spotlight, something else was revealed: they were in need of a good shake-up. For 14 years the three houses -- the Deutsche Oper in former West Berlin and the Staatsoper and Komische Oper in former East Berlin -- have been operating as independent fiefs, mirroring the old divide. Now they will be expected to respond more faithfully to the interests of a united Berlin.
Though it is once again the federal capital, Berlin is a relatively poor city lacking an industrial or financial base. One of its principal assets is culture, not only its fine museums and the legendary Berlin Philharmonic but also its opera houses. Yet unlike, say, the Vienna State Opera, Berlin opera houses have never reached out to tourists, even though attendance by Berliners is falling. Now Berlin's politicians want more for their money.
The key is the creation of the new Berlin Opera Foundation. Headed by a general manager to be named by the city, the foundation will have control over the three opera houses, the new Staatsballett and the service company that will manage costume and décor workshops. The foundation's component parts are all represented on a 10-member executive board, and have collective responsibility for opera and ballet in Berlin.
''In the past when they were in debt they'd come to the Senate and hold out their hand and ask for help,'' said Barbara Kisseler, the city's under secretary for culture, who is overseeing the reform. ''Now this has to be sorted out by the foundation.''
This was also a condition laid down by the federal government when it offered to help resolve the crisis. Reluctant to be seen directly subsidizing opera, it took charge of four city museums, freeing up $21 million in city funds, which are to be used by the foundation. Without that money the annual opera and ballet subsidy would have fallen to $100 million from $142 million; now it will level off at $121 million in 2009.
But that still leaves the foundation with a projected shortfall of $21 million, which will be only partly covered by the savings -- about $12 million -- achieved through sharing workshops and cutting, among artists, 18 musicians from the opera orchestras, 7 singers from the choruses and 28 dancers from the ballet companies. With the subsidy being reduced in stages, the foundation will be in the red again in 2007.
This has persuaded Mr. Barenboim and Peter Mussbach, the Staatsoper's general manager and artistic director, to oppose the changes. ''From 2007 the foundation will be in trouble,'' Mr. Mussbach said. ''The politicians are ceding their responsibilities to those who are the victims. They know full well that three opera houses cannot survive. But if one of them closes, it will be the fault of the foundation, not the politicians. This is a political trick.''
Mr. Barenboim and Mr. Mussbach also complain that the Staatsoper and its renowned orchestra, the Staatskapelle, are victims of success. While the Deutsche Oper and the Komische Oper have been operating with a deficit, the Staatsoper has prospered. A recent sold-out performance of Wagner's ''Meistersinger von Nürnberg,'' conducted by Simone Young, with the German baritone Falk Struckmann as Hans Sachs, was evidence of its musical excellence.
The Staatsoper still receives a hefty subsidy, but it averages 80 percent attendance -- compared with 68 percent at the Deutsche Oper and 50 percent at the Komische Oper -- and has been more creative in its programming. There was an early-music festival last month, and at an Easter Festival in April Mr. Barenboim is to conduct new productions of Schoenberg's ''Moses und Aron,'' Tchaikovsky's ''Queen of Spades'' and three concerts by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.
Mr. Barenboim's greatest fear is that the foundation will not respect the artistic independence of each house. ''If the foundation has a general manager who is responsible for all three houses,'' he said in a recent interview with the German weekly Die Zeit, ''it's not very credible that each house will keep its own identity. In the end, we won't have three different houses but only one house with three stages.''
Yet a common criticism has been that the houses lack clear identities. There was, for instance, frequent programming duplication, including one famous night when all three presented Mozart's ''Marriage of Figaro.'' It is therefore likely that the foundation will encourage the houses to develop different profiles. ''At the moment the repertories of the Deutsche Oper and the Staatsoper are interchangeable,'' Ms. Kisseler said.
If the Staatsoper feels victimized, the mood at the other two houses is more upbeat, if only because they started the year without a deficit. Still, each faces major problems. The Komische Oper's general manager and artistic director, Andreas Homoki, has lost some of the company's traditional East Berlin audience by modernizing productions.
The Deutsche Oper has been focusing on importing top singers -- the American tenor Robert Gambill recently sang the lead in Wagner's ''Tannhaüser'' -- but it has been without a general manager since Udo Zimmermann was forced out last year by the music director, Christian Thielemann. Ms. Kisseler said the house needed a general manager and a music director who work together.
As for the foundation's projected 2007 deficit, Ms. Kisseler said there was ample room for increasing efficiency in nonartistic areas and raising box office and other revenues. ''We need centralized artistic marketing to fill the houses,'' she said. ''At present there is not even central ticketing. Until now each house was interested only in itself. In future we have to serve the interests of all opera in Berlin.''
Correction:  March 3, 2004, Wednesday  A picture caption yesterday with an article about Berlin's three opera houses misspelled the name of a work heard recently at the Deutsche Staatsoper. It is ''Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg,'' not Miestersinger.
	Sixty years ago, Imre Kertész emerged as an emaciated Jewish teenager from the Nazi concentration camp at Buchenwald. Thirty years later, he relived his deportation, imprisonment and survival in a novel called ''Fateless.'' Now, at 76, the amiable Hungarian finds himself revisiting the experience as the writer of the script for a movie, also ''Fateless.''
''How can you not be touched by seeing your own story?'' asked Mr. Kertész, who won the 2002 Nobel prize for literature. ''I think the film is very beautiful, but it is not the book. The film is a visual thing. The child awakens immediate sympathy. The text should play a secondary role to the action and images.''
The notion of a ''beautiful'' Holocaust movie may seem as strange as the homesickness that Mr. Kertész recalled feeling for camp life when he returned to Budapest in July 1945. But ''Fateless'' is not a chronicle of the Holocaust as such. Rather, it is a coming-of-age story set amid humanity's ever-repeating cycles of barbarism.
The story has haunted much of Mr. Kertész's writing. And as author of the screenplay for Lajos Koltai's movie adaptation, which opens Friday at the Film Forum in New York, he is once again wrestling with these memories. He has condensed some scenes from the book, replaced most first-person narrative with visual metaphors and even added a couple of scenes.
''The film is more autobiographical than the book,'' he said in an interview at his Berlin home, where his wife, Magda, volunteered to interpret his Hungarian. ''I'm not even sure if I wrote the screenplay from memories or from memories of the book.''
Either way, the movie retains the dreamlike quality of the novel, recently published in a new English translation as ''Fatelessness'' (Vintage). And it is this quality that most distinguishes Mr. Kertész's very personal account of surviving the Holocaust. ''The film had to try very hard to avoid Holocaust clichés,'' Mr. Kertész said. ''It could be emotional, but never sentimental.''
In the novel, the story is recounted by Gyuri Köves, who is 14 in June 1944 when he is taken off a crowded bus in Budapest and deported with hundreds of other Jews to the Auschwitz death camp in Poland. In the movie, the story is seen mainly through the eyes of Gyuri, played by Marcell Nagy. In both cases, the plot advances in an almost matter-of-fact way.
Arriving in Auschwitz, Gyuri is told by other deportees to give his age as 16, a lie that saves him from immediate death. Three days later, he is sent to Buchenwald and subsequently to a labor camp at Zeitz, also in Germany. The months that follow are accompanied by fear, hunger, abuse and freezing temperatures, but also by moments of solidarity among the prisoners.
This solidarity saves Gyuri's life. Close to starvation, unable to work because of a badly injured knee, he is rescued from among the dying by political prisoners who enjoy privileges denied to Jews, including medical treatment. Gyuri is in the Buchenwald camp clinic -- where the doctors are also prisoners -- when American troops arrive.
In a scene not included in the novel, an American army officer, himself Jewish, encourages Gyuri to migrate to the United States, but the boy wants to return to his family in Budapest.
''The officer is a composite of various Americans who said the same thing,'' Mr. Kertész explained. ''For everyone, it was an important decision whether to return home or go somewhere else. Those who had an idea there would be socialism in Hungary did not go back. I couldn't imagine going anywhere except home. I was like a stray dog.''
But home was not as Mr. Kertész -- or Gyuri -- imagined it: his father had died in Mathausen, a Nazi labor camp in Austria; his stepmother had remarried; his home had been occupied by another family.
Even here, Gyuri cannot grasp that more than half a million Hungarian Jews have died in the Holocaust; when asked about the atrocities in the camps, he remembers his happiness.
''Yes,'' the novel concludes in Gyuri's voice, ''the next time I am asked, I ought to speak about that, the happiness of the concentration camps. If indeed I am asked. And provided I myself don't forget.''
If ''happiness'' in such circumstances still shocks, that was the author's intention. ''I took the word out of its everyday context and made it seem scandalous,'' Mr. Kertész said. ''It was an act of rebellion against the role of victim which society had assigned me. It was a way of assuming responsibility, of defining my own fate.''
Still, by the time the novel was published in 1975, Mr. Kertész was 45 and trapped in a different kind of camp, Hungary's Communist regime. And ''Fateless'' was largely ignored. Having lived off writing librettos for musical comedies, Mr. Kertész turned to translating German classics into Hungarian and did not publish another novel until 1988.
Then, with the collapse of the Soviet bloc, these and later novels were finally published in German and other European languages. But in Hungary, Mr. Kertész remained little read. In fact, although as early as 2000 he began discussing a screen adaptation of ''Fateless'' with Mr. Koltai, a veteran cinematographer, financing was only forthcoming after Mr. Kertész won the Nobel Prize in Literature in October 2002.
Mr. Koltai said he and Mr. Kertész agreed immediately to retell the story in the same linear fashion as the novel, without flashbacks or the use of archive images. ''We did not want sentimentality; we wanted to keep a distance,'' Mr. Koltai said in a telephone interview from Budapest. ''After Imre had finished the screenplay, he said, 'I give you this as a present, and then you give me the present back as a film.' ''
Costing $13 million, with 144 named roles and as many as 500 extras crowding a specially built ''concentration camp,'' ''Fateless'' is the most expensive Hungarian film ever made. It is also this year's most successful Hungarian film, as well as the Hungarian entry for best foreign language film at the 2006 Academy Awards.
''What was most exciting is that many teenagers went to see the movie in Hungary,'' Mr. Koltai said of the film, the first feature he has directed. ''They fall in love with the boy and realize that his fate could be their fate: just taken off a bus. It could happen to anyone anywhere in the world today.''
	On many Venetian evenings, Baroque music can be heard echoing from concerts in the city's myriad churches. In the 1750's, that same music also filled the air. Or so it would appear from Lasse Hallstrom's new romantic comedy, ''Casanova,'' in which the infamous rake goes about his mischief accompanied by Vivaldi, Albinoni, Corelli and the like.
Indeed, it might even be said that, along with Venice itself, Baroque music plays the libertine's accomplice here. And since ''Casanova'' is a period farce, it also seems logical for the score to embrace the humor and rhythms of opera buffa, as the 18th-century Italian comic opera was known.
And yet Baroque music lovers may well be puzzled.
They may recognize familiar passages, because almost all the music in ''Casanova'' has been taken from concertos, overtures and dances written by a dozen or so 18th-century composers. Yet, because the excerpts have been stitched together in an original -- and thoroughly cinematic -- way, they are actually hearing a ''new'' Baroque work.
The movie, which opened Dec. 25 to warm reviews, stars Heath Ledger as Casanova and Sienna Miller as Francesca Bruni, the woman he finally loves forever. (This is fiction.) Also on board are Jeremy Irons, Lena Olin, Oliver Platt and Omid Djalili. And then, moving the plot along at a 007 pace, through duels, trials and chases, is the score.
''It was just an obvious first idea to go with period music,'' Mr. Hallstrom said in a telephone interview from his home in Westchester County, N.Y. ''It's not the kind of story that needs the support of a modern score. It can take a light score, which can be elegant when it needs to be elegant. The editor and I were convinced we could do it with the old masters.''
Executives at Touchstone Pictures, the division of the Walt Disney Company that released the movie, were initially less sure. ''This was an unusual approach for a Hollywood movie,'' Andrew Mondshein, the film's editor, said by telephone from his home in Larchmont, N.Y., ''and the studio was concerned that we wouldn't be able to do an entire score with original material.''
Well, it was possible, and a CD soundtrack has been released to prove it. But the journey from idea to this reconstructed 18th-century score was anything but simple.
It helped that Mr. Hallstrom's upbringing in Sweden was steeped in music: he attended a school that specialized in music and music history, and he played the piano, sang in choirs and composed music. Years later, he made pop videos for Swedish television, while one of his first Swedish-language feature films, ''Happy We,'' was set in the world of opera.
For ''Casanova,'' though, he did not want a score that illustrated the action. ''I am suspicious of scores which support along the lines of what you're already seeing on the screen,'' he said. ''The American tendency is to underscore what it already up there. I wanted to add an irony or color or shading which doesn't go right along with the visuals.''
Still, shooting began in Venice last year without a decision on the score. Leslie Holleran, Mr. Hallstrom's longtime producer, who is married to Mr. Mondshein, said she had even discussed an original score with a ''very famous and expensive'' composer. But, she added, the director's idea of making a ''broad operatic high farce'' in the spirit of commedia dell'arte kept leading them back to period music.
While in Venice, with Baroque concerts being held in a church beside the movie's production office, Mr. Mondshein began selecting passages of 18th-century music and testing them on different scenes. Vivaldi is, of course, the Venetian composer par excellence. But, eager to avoid too-familiar music, Mr. Mondshein also turned to Vivaldi's contemporary, Tomaso Albinoni.
Once the studio had given its tentative approval for period music, the production then recruited Roy Prendergast, a New York-based movie music editor with a background in classical music and composition. ''When I looked at the film, I thought, this is opera buffa, this is farce,'' he said in a telephone interview, ''and I realized that the opera repertory could provide the most cinematic material.''
Although Vivaldi and Albinoni each wrote more than 50 operas, few of them have been recorded, and not all were in the opera buffa style. In contrast, Jean-Philippe Rameau, the 18th-century French composer, presented Mr. Prendergast with a rich choice of comic operas. ''Casanova'' includes no vocal excerpts, but Mr. Prendergast borrowed overtures and dances from eight Rameau operas, including ''Platée,'' ''Zoroastre'' and ''Zaïs.''
''I sort of ripped through the entire recorded repertory and just pulled things that I felt would work,'' he recalled. ''I was aware of a large part of the Baroque repertory from my background, but there was also a lot of music that I discovered, which was delightful.''
Vivaldi and Albinoni were not overlooked: there are passages from four Vivaldi concertos and one opera, ''Farnace,'' as well as from four Albinoni concertos. Four other Italian composers were also used -- Giovanni Paisiello, Arcangelo Corelli, Leonardo Leo and Francesco Durante -- as well as Vicente Martín y Soler, from Spain, and Johan Helmich Roman, from Sweden. Even Handel and Telemann make cameo appearances in the score.
But what about Mozart? Although he was born in 1756, three years after the film is set, legend has it that he consulted Giacomo Casanova before composing ''Don Giovanni,'' his opera about another serial seducer. Indeed, there is evidence that Casanova himself attended the opera's premiere in Prague on Oct. 29, 1787.
''After spending two weeks listening to nothing but Baroque music, I finally said, 'Well, now we can go to Mozart,' '' Mr. Prendergast said. ''And I started listening to Mozart, and it was as if I had just come out of a different era. My God, what a radical! Mozart's style was so very, very different from this material. It just didn't play.''
Mr. Prendergast put together a track from existing recordings, but he found there were still gaps, notably in what he called ''the most intimate emotional moments.'' For these passages, the French composer Alexandre Desplat, who is credited for ''original music,'' and the American composer and conductor Sonny Kompanek wrote short sections in the Baroque style.
The entire score also had to be rerecorded, and here, Mr. Prendergast needed to find original sheet music, itself no easy task. Then, through a copy-and-paste job, he created his final version, which runs for around 60 minutes of the 105-minute movie. In July, more than 40 Baroque musicians -- named the Hollywood Studio Symphony for the occasion -- joined Mr. Kompanek in New York to record the score, using period instruments.
''I apologized to them beforehand,'' Mr. Prendergast recalled. ''I said, 'I am the person responsible for chopping all this music up.' But they were wonderful. They were all so delighted that Baroque music was getting this kind of exposure.''
For his final edit, Mr. Mondshein said, his inspiration was comic opera. ''We mixed the music as another voice in the film, not as a background score,'' he said. To this, Ms. Holleran added excitedly: ''The music became the support on which the film could rest. It was a great adventure on top of a great adventure.''
	Political movies may rank alongside biopics as worthy endeavors that rarely succeed at the box office, but at least they have a safe haven at the Berlin International Film Festival. Born of the politics of the cold war, the Berlinale, as it is known, continues to address serious political and social issues.
''As long as I am director, the Berlinale will always be in some way political because I am working in the tradition of the festival,'' Dieter Kosslick said on Thursday just before the 54th edition, which will end on Sunday. Of course it also needs star power, provided this year by American movies like ''Cold Mountain'' and ''Something's Gotta Give,'' which used Berlin to start their European releases. But there are enough political movies in competition to secure the festival's identity.
One of this year's themes, Mr. Kosslick said, was South Africa, to note the 10th anniversary of the end of apartheid. And he was helped by John Boorman's ''Country of My Skull,'' which combined a weighty subject with Juliette Binoche and Samuel L. Jackson in leading roles. Sony Pictures Classics acquired North American rights to the film even before it was shown.
The film, based on a nonfiction book of that name by Antjie Krog, follows South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission as it tries to heal the wounds of apartheid by inviting perpetrators of racial violence to confess their crimes in front of their victims. The screen version then injects a love story between a white South African radio reporter, Anna Malan (Ms. Binoche), and a black Washington Post reporter, Langston Whitfield (Mr. Jackson).
The film centers on Anna as an Afrikaaner who faces the horrors done in the name of her race, Mr. Boorman (''Deliverance'' and ''Hope and Glory'') told reporters. ''Her relationship with Langston mirrors the larger situation in the commission and the country -- people finding ways of coming together and finding love,'' he said.
The strongest scenes show the commission as it travels around South African villages to hear witnesses and confessions. But halfway through the movie the love story begins to swamp the political story in sentimentality, and in the end the movie disappointed most film critics here.
If one purpose of political movies is to raise moral issues, ''Svjedoci'' (''Witnesses'') by the Croatian director Vinko Bresan proved more convincing. Based on Jurica Pavicic's novel ''Alabaster Sheep,'' it is set in the early 1990's during Croatia's war with Serbia and opens with three Croatian soldiers on leave from the front who decide to blow up the home of a Serb still living in Croatia. Through incompetence, they end up shooting the man and kidnapping his small daughter.
What follows is more unexpected. Even as dead and wounded Croats are being brought back from the war front, a few people in the town, notably a police detective and a journalist, decide that the cold-blooded murder of a Serb civilian, even one said to be getting rich as a smuggler, is not acceptable. To scrutinize this question from all sides, Mr. Bresan breaks the linear narrative by returning to key moments and seeing them from the point of view of different characters.
While the moral dilemmas raised are universal, Mr. Bresan also sought to draw attention to crimes committed by Croatians. ''In our society, our war crimes are not yet fully discussed or even defined,'' he said. ''It is necessary to talk of a system of evil created within our own society. And it is something difficult to fight, even with laws. If the film's ending is optimistic, it is not our reality, but what we would like to wish for.''
Less directly political but no less effective is Hans Petter Moland's ''Beautiful Country,'' based on an idea by Terrence Malick, who is also one of its producers. The movie follows Binh (Damien Nguyen), a young Vietnamese fathered by a G.I. during the Vietnam War, as he leaves his village for Ho Chi Minh City and eventually heads for the United States to find his father.
Accompanied by his small half-brother, Binh arrives in a small boat in Malaysia where, in a refugee camp, he meets Ling (Ling Bai), a beautiful Chinese woman who also dreams of reaching America. They soon find themselves with scores of other migrants in the hold of a dilapidated ship run by a smuggler captain (Tim Roth). Binh's little brother dies on board, but Binh and Ling make it to New York, where Binh continues to search for his father (Nick Nolte).
What makes the movie so gripping is not only the fine acting by Mr. Nguyen and Ms. Bai but also the ordinariness of the experience of the migrants: on any day there may be thousands of similar refugees from Asia and Africa crossing the seas in such perilous rust buckets.
''We did not want to glorify anything,'' said Mr. Molland, a Norwegian director (''Aberdeen''). ''The film is an odyssey and we tried to be true to the spirit of the voyage, which is not heroic.''
The migration issue, so topical in Europe today, is also examined in two films to be shown later this week. Ken Loach's ''Ae Fond Kiss'' echoes the ''Romeo and Juliet'' theme as Casim, the son of Pakistani immigrants to Scotland, falls in love with a young Catholic woman. And ''Gegen die Wand'' (''Head-On''), by the Turkish-German director Faith Akin, dwells on Sibel, the daughter of Turkish immigrants to Germany, who is trying to escape her strict Muslim home.
Perhaps the surprise of the festival so far is ''El Abrazo Partido'' (''Lost Embrace'') by the young Argentine director Daniel Burman. Made for under $1 million, it follows Ariel (Daniel Hendler), the grandson of Jews from Poland, as he tries to obtain a Polish passport to escape the narrow world of Jewish shopkeepers in the Barrio del Once in Buenos Aires. What holds him is the mystery of why his father left one day for Israel and never returned.
In its portrayal of the daily lives and loves of the struggling shopkeepers in a run-down mall, the movie provided the first humor of the festival's competition program, a humor that is both Jewish and Argentine.
The movie also explores the absent father-son relationship that consumes Ariel. ''I think it is interesting to show that father-son relationships are fictitious,'' the director said. ''They have to be built, compared to the mother-son relationship, which is a given. So the film is also about how someone goes about constructing the image of his father.''
	The Dada movement made its name in the early 20th century by trying to destroy the conventional notion of art. Taking literal inspiration from their exploits this week, a latter-day neo-Dadaist took a small hammer to Marcel Duchamp's ''Fountain,'' the factory-made urinal that is considered the cornerstone of Conceptual Art.
The assailant, a French performance artist named Pierre Pinoncelli, was immediately arrested after his act of vandalism, which took place on Wednesday, during the final days of the ''Dada'' exhibition at the Pompidou Center. The porcelain urinal was slightly chipped in the attack and was withdrawn to be restored. (The exhibition runs through Monday.)
Mr. Pinoncelli, 77, who urinated into the same urinal and struck it with a hammer in a show in Nîmes in 1993, has a long record of organizing bizarre happenings. Police officials said he again called his action a work of art, a tribute to Duchamp and other Dada artists.
Indeed, ''Fountain'' itself was rejected for being neither original nor art when Duchamp offered it for the first exhibition of the Society of Independent Artists in New York in 1917. That version of the urinal, displayed upside down and signed ''R. Mutt,'' was subsequently lost. The Pompidou's ''Fountain'' is one of eight signed replicas made by Duchamp in 1964.
After the attack on Wednesday, Mr. Pinoncelli was held by the police overnight. He was released on Thursday and ordered to appear in court here on Jan. 24 to answer charges of damaging the property of others. As in 1993, he could face a prison term or a fine. (After the first urinal attack, he was jailed for a month and fined the equivalent of $37,500.)
The Pompidou Center said it was too early to know the cost of restoring the work. (Curators said a different Duchamp urinal was already scheduled for inclusion in the version of the show traveling to the National of Gallery of Art in Washington, Feb. 19 through May 14, and to the Museum of Modern Art in New York, June 18 through Sept. 11.) The vandalism raises the persistent question of how valuable works of art can be protected in museums that log millions of visitors each year. Many paintings on display today are shielded by glass. At the Louvre, the ''Mona Lisa,'' which was stolen in 1911 and struck by a stone in 1956, is now in a sealed enclosure behind 1.52-inch-thick glass.
Mr. Pinoncelli's attack also refocuses attention on the perennial question of what defines art. The question, playfully yet provocatively raised by the Dada movement nearly a century ago, has been refreshed since the 1980's by succeeding waves of Conceptual, installation and performance art. Like this week's case, such protests are often waged by artists themselves.
In 1999, for example, two Chinese artists, Yuan Cai and Jian Jun Xi Ianjun, jumped on ''My Bed,'' a work by the British artist Tracey Emin comprising an unmade bed accompanied by empty bottles, dirty underwear and used condoms, that was on view at Tate Britain. The following year, the same two artists urinated on the Tate Modern's version of ''Fountain,'' noting that Duchamp himself said artists defined art.
A British artist, Michael Landy, held what he called ''Break Down'' in an empty department store in London in 2001: in this happening, he destroyed all his possessions, including art donated by friends. Two other British artists, the Chapman brothers, were accused of vandalism in 2003 when they added the faces of clowns and puppets to the 80 etchings in an edition of Goya's ''Disasters of War'' that they had purchased.
In 1991, an artist generally described as unbalanced attacked Michelangelo's ''David'' statue in Florence, Italy, and damaged a foot.
Among numerous other protests, blue dye was sprayed over Carl Andre's display of bricks at the Tate Gallery in London in 1976, and black ink was squirted into a transparent container displaying Damien Hirst's dead sheep preserved in formaldehyde at the Serpentine Gallery in London.
Still, not all vandalism is intended: another work by Mr. Hirst on display in a Mayfair gallery in 2001 -- half-full coffee cups, dirty ashtrays, beer bottles and the like -- was thrown away by cleaners who mistook it for refuse. The same thing happened at Tate Britain in 2004 to a work by Gustav Metzger, a bag of trash titled ''Recreation of First Public Demonstration of Auto-Destructive Art.''
In the case of Mr. Pinoncelli, who could not be reached on Friday, nothing is accidental. After he urinated in and damaged ''Fountain'' in the Carré d'Art in Nîmes, he said he wanted to rescue the work from its inflated status and restore it to its original use as a urinal.
Since the early 1960's, Mr. Pinoncelli, based in Nice, has been busy with what he calls ''les happenings de rue,'' or ''street happenings.'' In 1969, he used a water pistol to spray red paint on André Malraux, who was then the French culture minister. In 1975, he ''held up'' a bank in Nice with a fake gun to protest Nice's decision to become Cape Town's twin city while South Africa was still under apartheid rule. The same year, he paraded outside Nice's courts, covered in large yellow stars, in what he called a homage to deported Jews.
Perhaps his most striking act unfolded in 2002 at a festival of performance art in the Colombian city of Cali. There, he protested the kidnapping of a Colombian politician, Ingrid Betancourt, by the country's leftist guerrillas by chopping off half of the smallest finger of his left hand. He then used his blood to write ''FARC,'' the acronym of the guerrilla group (the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia), on a white wall.
''The idea was to share in Colombia's violence,'' he told reporters at the time. But it apparently did not impress the guerrillas: Ms. Betancourt is still being held.
	