Historians will look back in puzzlement at the way our 21st century world tolerates the slavery of more than a million children in brothels around the world.
India alone may have half a million children in its brothels, more than any other country in the world. Visit the brothel district in almost any city in India, and you can meet 14-year-old girls who have been kidnapped off the street, or drugged, or offered jobs as maids, and then sold into a world that they often escape only by dying of AIDS.
When I've written about ''sex slavery'' in the past, from Cambodia, I've sensed that readers assume the term is hyperbole. See if you still think so after hearing the story of Geeta Ghosh (video of Geeta is at www.nytimes.com/kristof).
Geeta grew up in a village in rural India and attended only two months of school; like many of the girls who are trafficked, she is illiterate. Her own family abused her, but at age 11 she found refuge with her best friend's aunt.
For a year, ''Auntie'' looked after Geeta with a warmth that she had never found at home. Then one day when Geeta was 12 -- but still physically a little girl, well short of puberty -- the aunt took her to a beauty parlor. ''You look a bit ugly, so why not try to look prettier?'' Auntie suggested.
Then the aunt locked her in a soundproof room in a brothel with an Arab man who bought her virginity. ''I was very terrified to see this huge man in front of me,'' Geeta remembers, adding, ''I cried a lot and fell to his feet, pleading.''
''He pulled off my dress, and the rapes went on for a month like that. He made me sleep naked beside him, and he drank a lot, and he hurt me so much.''
After that, the brothel owner peddled Geeta daily for five years -- and only after eight months as a prostitute did she mature enough to get her first period. The brothel owner kept her confined in the brothel for the first three years, beating her with sticks and threatening her with a knife to warn what would happen if Geeta tried to escape.
''There was a big drain in the house for sewage,'' Geeta remembers. ''The madam said, 'If you ever try to run away, we'll chop you up and throw the pieces down this drain.' ''
After three years, Geeta was allowed on the street in front of the brothel. But although police officers sometimes walked by, she says that running to them would have been pointless -- the madam paid them good bribes, so they would simply have returned her to the brothel.
One taxi driver regularly visited Geeta, and gradually they became close. ''It may not have been love, but he was sympathetic,'' she says. Finally, he helped her escape from the brothel, and now they are married and have four children.
In the five years in which Geeta was imprisoned in the brothel, she never was given any money. Every single rupee she earned went to her owner.
I visited the one-room hovel where Geeta and her family now live in a Calcutta slum. The home is the size of a walk-in American closet, mostly taken up by a bed raised up on bricks. Three of the children sleep on the bed, and the parents and the youngest child sleep underneath it. The slum is squalid, and a nearby sewage canal sometimes floods their home -- but Geeta is happy, because she is free.
All around India and the world, girls are still locked up in brothels as Geeta was. Indeed, sex trafficking is one problem that appears to have become worse around the globe, as organized crime, increased mobility and the rise of markets have turned pubescent flesh into a tradable international commodity. Moreover, fear of AIDS has nurtured markets for virgins and younger children who customers think are less likely to have H.I.V.
The Lancet, the British medical journal, has estimated: ''The number of prostituted children is thought to be increasing and could be as high as 10 million.''
Of course, not all can realistically be called ''slaves.'' There is a continuum of coercion among under-age prostitutes that runs all the way from older teenagers who choose prostitution to 10-year-olds who are kidnapped off the street and locked up in cages.
In my next column, I'll talk about what can be done to help sex trafficking victims like Geeta. It's time to emancipate them.
Op-Ed Columnist
	When President Bush held a public meeting with troops by satellite last fall, they were miraculously upbeat. And all along, unrepentant hawks (most of whom have never been to Iraq) have insisted that journalists are misreporting Iraq and that most soldiers are gung-ho about their mission.
Hogwash! A new poll to be released today shows that U.S. soldiers overwhelmingly want out of Iraq -- and soon.
The poll is the first of U.S. troops currently serving in Iraq, according to John Zogby, the pollster. Conducted by Zogby International and LeMoyne College, it asked 944 service members, ''How long should U.S. troops stay in Iraq?''
Only 23 percent backed Mr. Bush's position that they should stay as long as necessary. In contrast, 72 percent said that U.S. troops should be pulled out within one year. Of those, 29 percent said they should withdraw ''immediately.''
That's one more bit of evidence that our grim stay-the-course policy in Iraq has failed. Even the American troops on the ground don't buy into it -- and having administration officials pontificate from the safety of Washington about the need for ordinary soldiers to stay the course further erodes military morale.
While the White House emphasizes the threat from non-Iraqi terrorists, only 26 percent of the U.S. troops say that the insurgency would end if those foreign fighters could be kept out. A plurality believes that the insurgency is made up overwhelmingly of discontented Iraqi Sunnis.
So what would it take to win in Iraq? Maybe that was the single most depressing finding in this poll.
By a two-to-one ratio, the troops said that ''to control the insurgency we need to double the level of ground troops and bombing missions.'' And since there is zero chance of that happening, a majority of troops seemed to be saying that they believe this war to be unwinnable.
This first systematic look at the views of the U.S. troops on the ground suggests that our present strategy in Iraq is failing badly. The troops overwhelmingly don't want to ''stay the course,'' and they don't seem to think the American strategy can succeed.
It's tempting, but not very helpful, to repeat that the fatal mistake was invading Iraq three years ago and leave it at that. That's easy for a columnist to say; the harder thing for a policy maker is to figure out what we do next, now that we're already there.
I still believe that while the war was a dreadful mistake, an immediate pullout would also be a misstep: anyone who says that Iraq can't get worse hasn't seen a country totally torn apart by chaos and civil war. Mr. Bush is right about the consequences of an immediate pullout -- to Iraq, and also to American influence around the world.
But while we shouldn't rush for the exits immediately, we should lay out a timetable for withdrawal that would remove all troops by the end of next year. And we should state clearly that we will not keep any military bases in Iraq -- that's a no-brainer, for it costs us nothing, but our hedging on bases antagonizes Iraqi nationalists and results in more dead Americans.
Such a timetable would force Iraqis to prepare -- politically and militarily -- to run their own country. The year or two of transition would galvanize Iraqi Shiites to find a modus vivendi with Sunnis while undermining the insurgents' arguments that they are nationalists protecting the motherland from Yankee crusaders.
True, a timetable is arbitrary and risky, for it could just encourage insurgents to hang tight for another couple of years. But we're being killed -- literally -- because of nationalist suspicions among Iraqis that we're just after their oil and bases and that we're going to stay forever. It's crucial that we defuse that nationalist rage.
For now, we've become the piñata of Iraqi politics, something for Iraqi demagogues to bash to boost their own legitimacy. Moktada al-Sadr, one of the scariest Iraqi leaders, has very shrewdly used his denunciations of the U.S. to boost his own political following and influence across Iraq; that's our gift to him, a consequence of our myopia. And many ordinary Iraqis are buying into this scapegoating of the U.S. Edward Wong, one of my intrepid Times colleagues in Baghdad, quoted a clothing merchant named Abdul-Qader Ali as saying: ''I can tell you the main reason behind all our woes -- it is America. Everything that is going on between Sunnis and Shiites, the troublemaker in the middle is America.''
Will a timetable work? I don't know, but it's a better bet than our present policy of whistling in the dark. And it's what the troops favor -- and they're the ones who have Iraq combat experience. It's time our commander in chief stopped stage-managing his troops and listened to them.
Op-Ed Columnist
	The villagers in this hamlet of thatch-roof mud huts told me that they had shot dead a member of the brutal janjaweed militia and pointed to his body. I walked over to look at the corpse -- and his eyes opened.
He was a teenager, perhaps 16, shot down as he and four other raiders attacked this village along the Chad-Sudan border. Most of these villages near the town of Adé are unarmed, and it is easy for members of the Arab janjaweed to kill, rape and pillage with impunity, while yelling racial epithets against the black African tribes they attack. But someone in this village had an AK-47 and used it to fend off the attack.
The boy on the ground was slight and wearing old and filthy clothes. He followed me with his eyes for 10 seconds and then closed them, moaning softly. He had been shot in the waist and could not move.
The janjaweed are the brutes, armed and paid by the Sudanese government, who have engaged in a genocidal campaign to destroy villages of African tribes in the Darfur region of Sudan. Now Sudan, encouraged by the feebleness of the international community's response, is expanding the genocide by sending the raiders to attack the same tribes in neighboring Chad.
The villagers vowed not to kill the boy (they were indignant that I thought they might), and promised to turn him over to the government. And then they showed me someone still more interesting: another captured janjaweed youth who was able to tell his story.
This young man was tied up, not particularly harshly, in a hut. He had a bloody gash on his forehead where he had been hit with a machete, and it seemed he might lose his eye, but he was easily able to answer questions.
''My name is Isak Muhammad,'' he began. ''I am 21 years old.'' Video of him, of the boy who was shot and of other scenes from my journey along the Chad-Sudan border, can be found at www.nytimes.com/kristof.
Mr. Isak was not driven by racist abhorrence for the Wadai tribe of this village, for he is a Wadai himself. He said a militia leader had simply promised the raiders $250 if they succeeded in killing the sheik, as a way to terrorize villagers and drive them away.
Where did the militia leader get his money? Almost certainly from the Sudanese government.
The Sudanese authorities may not have the money to feed their people, but they are spending lavishly on arming proxy forces to invade Chad, in hopes of destabilizing tribes and installing a pro-Sudanese pawn as the leader of Chad.
So the genocide is not just driven by hatred, but also by opportunistic mercenaries. Consider the founder of the janjaweed, Sheik Musa Hilal, a ferocious Arab nationalist who has shown particular vigor in slaughtering members of the Zaghawa tribe. According to a longtime acquaintance of Mr. Musa, the sheik's own mother is Zaghawa.
As in Rwanda or even during the Holocaust, racist ideologies sometimes disguise greed, insecurity and other pathologies. Indeed, one of the genocide's aims is to drive away African tribes to achieve what Hitler called Lebensraum: ''living space'' for nomadic Arabs and their camels.
So this village is simply a window into an entire region drenched in fear. Men walk about carrying homemade spears and machetes, and parents tie amulets around their children's necks.
As we left the village, I met a search party looking for six men who had disappeared after an attack by other raiders. ''We heard gunshots over there a couple of minutes ago,'' said one man, pointing to a nearby hill. ''We'll wait two hours and then go over and see who was shot.''
As the local county leader, Saudi Hassan, puts it, ''The janjaweed are using humans as targets -- they kill a person as if he were a chicken.'' Whether the offenders are Nazis or Hutu extremists or Sudan's janjaweed, that is a crime not only against the victims but also against all humanity. You can get ideas about what you can do at www.savedarfur.org, the Web site of the Save Darfur Coalition, which is planning a major rally on the Washington Mall on April 30.
It is brutally demoralizing for people in these villages to be hunted down as if they were wild beasts, to have their children pulled from their arms and thrown into burning huts. But we should be just as demoralized by our own indifference. The shame belongs not to the good people of Darfur and Chad, but to ourselves.
Op-Ed Columnist
	