On the seventh day of the new Medicare drug benefit, Stephen Starnes began hearing voices again, ominous voices, and he started to beg for the medications he had been taking for 10 years. But his pharmacy could not get approval from his Medicare drug plan, so Mr. Starnes was admitted to a hospital here for treatment of paranoid schizophrenia.
Mr. Starnes, 49, lives in Dayspring Village, a former motel that is licensed by the State of Florida as an assisted living center for people with mental illness. When he gets his medications, he is stable.
''Without them,'' he said, ''I get aggravated at myself, I have terrible pain in my gut, I feel as if I am freezing one moment and burning up the next moment. I go haywire, and I want to hurt myself.''
Mix-ups in the first weeks of the Medicare drug benefit have vexed many beneficiaries and pharmacists. Dr. Steven S. Sharfstein, president of the American Psychiatric Association, said the transition from Medicaid to Medicare had had a particularly severe impact on low-income patients with serious, persistent mental illnesses.
''Relapse, rehospitalization and disruption of essential treatment are some of the consequences,'' Dr. Sharfstein said.
Dr. Jacqueline M. Feldman, a professor of psychiatry at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, said that two of her patients with schizophrenia had gone to a hospital emergency room because they could not get their medications. Dr. Feldman, who is also the director of a community mental health center, said ''relapse is becoming more frequent'' among her low-income Medicare patients.
Emma L. Hayes, director of emergency services at Ten Broeck Hospital, a psychiatric center in Jacksonville, said, ''We have seen some increase in admissions, and anticipate a lot more,'' as people wrestle with the new drug benefit.
Medicare's free-standing prescription drug plans are not responsible for the costs of hospital care or doctors' services. ''They have no business incentive to worry about those costs,'' said Dr. Joseph J. Parks, medical director of the Missouri Department of Mental Health, who reported that many of his Medicare patients had been unable to get medicines or had experienced delays.
At least 24 states have taken emergency action to pay for prescription drugs if people cannot obtain them by using the new Medicare drug benefit. Florida is not among those states.
In an interview, Alan M. Levine, secretary of the Florida Agency for Health Care Administration, said: ''We've set up a phone line and an e-mail address for pharmacists. We try to solve these problems on a case-by-case basis. We have stepped in to get drug plans to pay for prescriptions, so people don't leave the pharmacy without their medications.''
Federal officials said they were moving aggressively to fix problems with the drug benefit. About 250 federal employees have been enlisted as caseworkers to help individual patients. The government has told insurers to provide a temporary supply -- typically 30 days -- of any prescription that a person was previously taking. And Medicare has sent data files to insurers, supposedly listing all low-income people entitled to extra help with premiums and co-payments.
But in many cases, pharmacists say, they still cannot get the information needed to submit claims, to verify eligibility or to calculate the correct co-payments for low-income people. And often, they say, they must wait for hours when they try to reach insurers by telephone.
S. Kimberly Belshé, secretary of the California Health and Human Services Agency, said the actions taken by the federal government ''have not been sufficient to address the problems that California residents continue to experience.''
At Dayspring Village, in the northeast corner of Florida near Jacksonville, the 80 residents depend heavily on medications. They line up for their medicines three times a day. Members of the staff, standing at a counter, dispense the pills through a window that looks like the ticket booth at a movie theater.
Most of the residents are on Medicare, because they have disabilities, and Medicaid, because they have low incomes. Before Jan. 1, the state's Medicaid program covered their drugs at no charge. Since then, the residents have been covered by a private insurance company under contract to Medicare.
For the first time, residents of Dayspring Village found this month that they were being charged co-payments for their drugs, typically $3 for each prescription. The residents take an average of eight or nine drugs, so the co-payments can take a large share of their cash allowance, which is $54 a month.
Even after the insurer agreed to relax ''prior authorization'' requirements for a month, it was charging high co-payments for some drugs -- $52 apiece for Abilify, an anti-psychotic medicine, and Depakote, a mood stabilizer used in treating bipolar disorder.
The patients take antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia; more drugs to treat side effects of those drugs, like tremors and insomnia; and still other drugs to treat chronic conditions like diabetes and high blood pressure.
''If I didn't have any of those medications, I would probably be institutionalized for the rest of my life,'' said Deborah Ann Katz, a 36-year-old Medicare beneficiary at Dayspring. ''I'd be hallucinating, hearing voices.''
Michael D. Ranne, president of the Jacksonville chapter of the National Alliance on Mental Illness, said the use of powerful psychiatric medications ''virtually emptied out state mental hospitals'' in the 1970's and early 80's. Ms. Katz said she had been ''in and out of hospitals'' since she was 13.
Sponsors of the 2003 Medicare law wanted to drive down costs by creating a competitive market for drug insurance. They focused on older Americans, not the disabled. They assumed that beneficiaries would sort through various drug plans to find the one that best met their needs. But that assumption appears unrealistic for people at Dayspring Village.
Heidi L. Fretheim, a case manager for Dayspring residents, said: ''If I take them shopping at Wal-Mart, the experience is overwhelming for them. They get nervous. They think the clerks are plotting against them, or out to hurt them.''
Residents of Dayspring Village see worms in their food. Some neglect personal hygiene because they hear voices in the shower. When nurses draw blood, some patients want the laboratory to return it so the blood can be put back in their veins.
Under the 2003 Medicare law, low-income people entitled to both Medicare and Medicaid are exempted from all co-payments if they live in a nursing home. But the exemption does not apply to people in assisted living centers like Dayspring Village.
Douglas D. Adkins, executive director of Dayspring Village, said: ''Some of the pharmacists have been saying, 'No pills unless we get a co-payment.' Well, how are these people going to get the money for a co-payment? They don't have it.''
Eunice Medina, a policy analyst at the Florida Department of Elder Affairs, said the state was trying to ''find a solution'' for people in assisted living centers.
''We are all aware that the next couple of months will be difficult for these clients, and that the possibility of a transition to a nursing home is their only option if prescriptions are not covered in assisted living facilities,'' Ms. Medina said in a memorandum to local social service agencies.
Luis E. Collazo, administrator of Palm Breeze, an assisted living center for the mentally ill in Hialeah, Fla., said many of his residents were forgoing their medications on account of the new co-payments.
''Because of their mental illness,'' Mr. Collazo said, ''they don't have the insight to realize the consequences of not taking their medications. Without their medicines, they will definitely go into the hospital.''
	In his budget next week, President Bush will propose substantial savings in Medicare, stepping up his efforts to rein in the growing costs of social insurance programs, administration officials and health care lobbyists said Friday.
For the first time since taking office five years ago, they said, Mr. Bush will try to reduce projected Medicare payments to hospitals and other health care providers by billions of dollars over the next five years. In addition, they said, Mr. Bush intends to seek further increases in Medicare premiums for high-income people, beyond those already scheduled to take effect next year.
Despite the failure of his plan to overhaul Social Security last year, Mr. Bush has signaled that he intends to curb rapid increases in federal spending linked to the aging of the population. ''The retirement of the baby boom generation will put unprecedented strains on the federal government,'' Mr. Bush said in his State of the Union address on Tuesday.
Administration officials, Congressional aides and lobbyists said the president was contemplating a package of proposals that would cut the projected growth in Medicare spending by $30 billion to $35 billion in the next five years. That represents less than 1.5 percent of total Medicare spending in those years. But whether Congress has the appetite to trim popular benefit programs in an election year is unclear.
The House passed another deficit-reduction bill this week by just two votes, underscoring the qualms among moderate Republicans about how far to go in limiting the growth of domestic programs at a time when the administration continues to push tax cuts.
Mr. Bush plans to send his budget for next year to Congress on Monday. Many of his proposals follow recommendations from the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, an independent federal panel.
At a meeting last month, the panel said hospitals did not have to be fully compensated for the increased costs of the goods and services they used. These costs are expected to rise 3.4 percent in the fiscal year 2007. But the panel said that hospitals could get along with a smaller increase, 2.95 percent, if they became more efficient.
Jack Ashby, a research director at the commission, said, ''We expect the recommendation to have no effect on hospitals' ability to furnish care to Medicare beneficiaries.''
But Richard J. Pollack, executive vice president of the American Hospital Association, said the cutback could damage the quality of hospital care. Already, he said, two-thirds of hospitals lose money serving Medicare patients.
''At the same time cuts are being proposed,'' Mr. Pollack said, ''demands on hospitals are increasing. We are taking care of a rising number of uninsured, we are investing in new technology to increase patient safety and to move toward electronic medical records, and we are preparing for emergencies, including the threat of pandemic disease.''
The president's 2007 budget also calls for a freeze in Medicare payments to nursing homes and home health agencies, as recommended by the commission. In addition, he proposes to reduce payments for oxygen equipment provided to Medicare beneficiaries.
This proposal is likely to touch off protests from a coalition of patients and oxygen suppliers. The coalition has been running television commercials against a powerful California congressman who has supported such changes.
In one commercial, an Air Force veteran, with an oxygen tube in his nose, asks the congressman, Representative Bill Thomas: ''I was proud to fight for my country. Why are you not willing to fight for me?''
Mr. Thomas, who is a Republican and the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, denounced the commercials. ''It's outrageous that some companies are trying to scare seniors,'' he said Friday.
Mr. Bush's budget does not seek any change in Medicare payments for doctors. Their payments were frozen this year. Under current law, they will be cut more than 4 percent next year.
Beneficiaries now pay premiums of $88.50 a month -- more than $1,000 a year -- for coverage of doctors' visits and other outpatient care.
Under the 2003 Medicare law, any beneficiary with more than $80,000 of annual income will have to pay higher premiums in 2007 and later years. For people with incomes of $100,000 to $150,000, premiums would more than double.
Under the law, the income thresholds are increased each year to reflect inflation. Mr. Bush's proposal would eliminate these adjustments, so that more people would have to pay the higher premiums each year.
The last three presidents regularly proposed to cut Medicare payments to hospitals below the levels needed to keep up with inflation. But in the last five years, Mr. Bush generally avoided making such proposals. In 2002 and 2003, he was trying to persuade Congress to expand the program by adding a drug benefit. In later years, he did not want to reopen the debate over Medicare, for fear that Congress would alter the drug benefit.
Medicare spending totaled $333 billion last year. Under current law, it will climb by one-third in two years, reaching $445 billion in 2007, as the new prescription drug program gets under way, the Congressional Budget Office says.
William A. Dombi, vice president of the National Association for Home Care, a trade group, said that a freeze in Medicare payments to home care agencies in 2007, coming on top of a freeze this year, would reduce access to such services for patients in some parts of the country.
But the Medicare payment commission said that home care agencies could reduce the number of visits for a patient or reduce the cost of services to offset the effects of a freeze. Sharon Bee Cheng, an analyst at the commission, said she expected ''no adverse impacts'' on patients or providers of home care.
Nursing home operators said it would be absurd to freeze their Medicare payments at a time when patients, their relatives and the Bush administration were demanding improvements in the quality of care. But the staff of the Medicare payment commission said current rates were ''more than adequate.''
	The Bush administration is headed for a confrontation with states over the financing of Medicaid, the nation's largest health program, as federal officials crack down on arrangements used by many states to shift costs to the federal government.
The federal action comes as states, struggling with severe fiscal problems, are cutting benefits and restricting eligibility for the program, which serves 50 million low-income people each year.
Federal officials and auditors contend that states use creative bookkeeping and other ploys to obtain large amounts of federal Medicaid money without paying their share.
Washington and the states split Medicaid costs, with the federal government paying 50 percent and sometimes more than 70 percent.
But in many cases, the Bush administration says, states have paid their share with ''phantom dollars,'' instead of state or local tax revenues.
State officials acknowledge their desire to make the most of federal Medicaid payments at a time when health costs are soaring. The National Conference of State Legislatures advises its members on ''Medicaid maximization'' strategies and says such techniques are legitimate and desperately needed to avoid cutting benefits for poor people.
The dispute will be high on the agenda when the National Governors Association holds its winter meeting here beginning Saturday.
The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, recently added Medicaid to its list of high-risk programs. It said, ''States have used various financing schemes to generate excessive federal Medicaid matching funds while their own share of expenditures has remained unchanged or decreased.''
In some cases, it said, ''states have created the illusion that they have made large Medicaid payments'' to county hospitals and nursing homes, and they claimed federal Medicaid money to help defray the costs, even as they required counties to return most of the money to the state.
Federal investigators have found such practices in Alabama, Illinois, Michigan, Nebraska, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Washington, among other states.
In his new budget, President Bush said he could save $1.5 billion next year and $23.6 billion in the coming decade by restoring the ''fiscal integrity'' of Medicaid.
''The Medicaid program must be a federal-state partnership, not an exercise in financial gamesmanship,'' said Dennis G. Smith, the top federal official for Medicaid.
Mr. Smith said states were using ''complex, creative financing schemes'' and exploiting loopholes in federal laws and regulations to ''shift a larger portion of Medicaid costs to the federal government.''
When Mr. Bush took office, he vowed to speed the approval of changes in state Medicaid programs after a large backlog had accumulated. But the process has bogged down as federal officials try to ferret out improprieties in Medicaid financing.
Melanie M. Bella, the Medicaid director in Indiana, said she had been negotiating with federal officials for nearly a year on a proposal to increase payments to doctors from the Indiana University School of Medicine who care for Medicaid patients at the county Wishard Memorial Hospital in Indianapolis.
The county is willing to pay the state's share of the extra cost. But the Bush administration says it wants to curb such ''intergovernmental transfers'' because they have been abused in the past to gain what the budget described as ''inordinate amounts of federal Medicaid funds.''
''It would be a real hardship if we cannot use county tax money,'' Ms. Bella said. ''This is headed down a path that will increase the number of uninsured. With the proposed restrictions on our use of state and local revenue, states will have to cut services, reduce payments to health care providers or eliminate groups of recipients.''
Dr. Ron J. Anderson, president of Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas, said: ''Intergovernmental transfer payments have been a godsend. They keep us alive.''
Alan G. Rosenbloom, president of the Pennsylvania Health Care Association, a lobby group for nursing homes, said the federal proposals ''threaten access to care, the quality of care and the viability of nursing homes.''
In Pennsylvania, he said, ''county money is used to leverage federal money, which benefits both public and private nursing homes.''
New York spends more on Medicaid than any other state does. It has long required counties to pay some expenses, 25 percent of the cost of hospital services, for example.
Though federal officials have not publicly challenged this arrangement, state officials say they have been stymied in winning approval for extra payments to public hospitals run by the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation and the State University of New York.
In a notice published this month in the Federal Register and in the draft of a letter to state Medicaid directors, the Bush administration said it would soon require states to provide a detailed description of ''each source of revenue'' used to pay their share of Medicaid costs.
Under the plan, state Medicaid budgets would be subject to federal approval, and states could not draw federal money for extra costs ''unless and until the expenditures are approved'' at the federal level.
State officials bristled at the prospect of such a change.
''The new system would be a radical departure from the current open-ended system of Medicaid cash reimbursement,'' said Vic Miller, a senior fellow at Federal Funds Information for States, a joint project of the governors' association and the legislatures' conference.
Mary B. Kennedy, the Medicaid director in Minnesota, said: ''Federal officials see themselves as having prior approval over state budgets. State legislators do not see that as a proper role.''
Charles A. Miller, a Washington lawyer who has represented state governments for more than 25 years, suggested that the federal scrutiny was ''intended to put pressure on states to come around to supporting or accepting a block grant,'' with fixed allotments of federal money. Mr. Bush made such a proposal last year, but it gained little traction in Congress or among governors.
Federal and state Medicaid spending shot up nearly 60 percent in the last five years, to more than $265 billion in 2003, and federal officials say it will double in the coming decade as the population ages.
Kathryn G. Allen, a health care specialist at the General Accounting Office, said: ''State financing schemes have driven up federal Medicaid costs. Congress has repeatedly tried to curtail such arrangements, but states have consistently developed new variations.''
In one example described by Tommy G. Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, county nursing homes borrowed $1.5 billion from a commercial bank. The money was transferred to a state account, then to the counties, which paid the loan. The state, which Secretary Thompson did not name, claimed it had spent the full amount on medical care and drew down more than $800 million in federal payments.
Senator Don Nickles, Republican of Oklahoma and chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, said: ''I am outraged at this practice. It needs to be stopped.''
	With tens of thousands of people unable to get medicines promised by Medicare, the Bush administration has told insurers that they must provide a 30-day supply of any drug that a beneficiary was previously taking, and it said that poor people must not be charged more than $5 for a covered drug.
The actions came after several states declared public health emergencies, and many states announced that they would step in to pay for prescriptions that should have been covered by the federal Medicare program.
Republicans have joined Democrats in asserting that the federal government botched the beginning of the prescription drug program, which started on Jan. 1. People who had signed up for coverage found that they were not on the government's list of subscribers. Insurers said they had no way to identify poor people entitled to extra help with their drug costs. Pharmacists spent hours on the telephone trying to reach insurance companies that administer the drug benefit under contract to Medicare.
Many of the problems involve low-income people entitled to both Medicare and Medicaid.
In a directive sent to all Medicare drug plans over the weekend, the Bush administration said they ''must take immediate steps'' to ensure that low-income beneficiaries were not charged more than $2 for a generic drug and $5 for a brand-name drug.
In addition, it said insurers must cover a 30-day emergency supply of drugs that beneficiaries were taking prior to the start of the new program.
In an interview yesterday, Dr. Mark B. McClellan, administrator of the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said that ''several hundred thousand beneficiaries who switched plans'' in December may have had difficulty filling prescriptions in the last two weeks.
In California, officials estimate that 200,000 of the state's 1.1 million low-income Medicare beneficiaries had trouble getting their medications.
Despite these problems, Dr. McClellan said, Medicare is now covering one million prescriptions a day. With the latest corrective actions, he said, ''all beneficiaries should be able to get their prescriptions filled.''
In the past, such predictions proved to be premature. New problems appeared as old ones were solved, and some insurers were slow to carry out federal instructions.
Since the program began on Jan. 1, many low-income people have left pharmacies empty-handed after being told they would have to pay co-payments of $100, $250 or more.
About 20 states, including California, Illinois, Ohio, Pennsylvania and all of New England, have announced that they will help low-income people by paying drug claims that should have been paid by the federal Medicare program.
''The new federal program is too complicated for many people to understand, and the implementation of the new program by the federal government has been awful,'' said Gov. Tim Pawlenty of Minnesota, a Republican. On Saturday, he signed an emergency executive order making the state a ''payer of last resort'' for the out-of-pocket drug costs.
The Bush administration said it was rushing to provide insurers with correct information about the extra subsidies available to low-income people enrolled in their plans.
''We sent files to all plans providing complete information on dual-eligible beneficiaries'' entitled to both Medicare and Medicaid, Dr. McClellan said. ''The plans now have all the information in one place.''
The new drug benefit is the most significant expansion of Medicare since creation of the program in 1965.
The president of MemberHealth, which offers three national Medicare drug plans, has apologized to pharmacists for problems that plagued the new benefit.
''We expected much more of ourselves, and certainly our performance in the first two weeks was a disappointment,'' the company's president, Charles E. Hallberg, said in a letter sent Friday to pharmacists. ''For that, I want to personally apologize to each of you.''
Mr. Hallberg said that druggists ''have experienced unacceptable wait times for customer service because we were unable to keep up with the extraordinary call volume.''
In an interview, Mr. Hallberg said that 700,000 people had enrolled in his drug plans, marketed under the name Community Care Rx.
Any of the 42 million Medicare beneficiaries can sign up for the new drug coverage. Federal officials say that a surge in enrollments occurred in late December. About 6.2 million low-income people who had drug coverage under Medicaid were automatically enrolled in Medicare drug plans, and some of them have switched to other Medicare plans.
The handling of the drug benefit threatens to become a political liability for Republicans, as older voters and people with disabilities complain that they have been denied essential medications.
Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas, a Republican who is chairman of the National Governors Association, declared a public health emergency.
In Wisconsin, Gov. James E. Doyle, a Democrat, said: ''It is outrageous how the federal government has mishandled this program and put thousands of lives at risk. As an emergency measure, the state will step in to ensure that no seniors go without lifesaving medicines.''
The Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, said the mismanagement of the program had had ''devastating consequences for seniors.'' In a letter signed by 34 other Democrats, Mr. Reid said, ''We want to know why so many of our constituents have fallen through the cracks.'' Democrats had predicted many of the problems, he said.
The concern was bipartisan. Senator Judd Gregg, Republican of New Hampshire, said many people had been ''turned away at their pharmacies or told that they must purchase the drugs up front and seek reimbursement later.''
''These are very vulnerable people who do not have the means to pay for their prescriptions and who cannot go without their medications,'' Mr. Gregg said.
	The Bush administration says it improperly altered a report documenting large racial and ethnic disparities in health care, but it will soon publish the full, unexpurgated document.
''There was a mistake made,'' Tommy G. Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, told Congress last week. ''It's going to be rectified.''
Mr. Thompson said that ''some individuals took it upon themselves'' to make the report sound more positive than was justified by the data.
The reversal comes in response to concerns of Democrats and the Senate majority leader, Bill Frist, Republican of Tennessee. They are pushing separate bills to improve care for members of minorities.
''African-Americans and Native Americans die younger than any other racial or ethnic group,'' Dr. Frist said. ''African-Americans, Native Americans and Hispanic Americans are at least twice as likely to suffer from diabetes and experience serious complications. These gaps are unacceptable.''
President Bush's budget would cut spending for the training of health professionals and would eliminate a $34 million program that recruits blacks and Hispanics for careers as doctors, nurses and pharmacists.
On Wednesday, more than 60 influential scientists, including 20 Nobel laureates, issued a statement criticizing what they described as the misuse of science by the administration to bolster its policies on the environment, arms control and public health.
Representative Henry A. Waxman, Democrat of California, said the changes in the report on health disparities were ''another example of the administration's manipulation of science to fit its political goals.''
But William A. Pierce, a spokesman for the Department of Health and Human Services, said the changes had occurred as part of a ''routine review process'' and were not intended to minimize the problem.
The report, the first of its kind, was prepared under a 1999 law that requires officials to issue such reports every year.
The theme of the original report was that members of minorities ''tend to be in poorer health than other Americans'' and that ''disparities are pervasive in our health care system,'' contributing to higher rates of disease and disability.
By contrast, the final report has an upbeat tone, beginning, ''The overall health of Americans has improved dramatically over the last century.''
The report was prepared by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, led by Dr. Carolyn M. Clancy. Administration officials said that she and her researchers had fought hard, at some professional risk, to protect the integrity of the report, but eventually went along with the revisions.
''No data or statistics in the report were altered in any way whatsoever,'' Dr. Clancy said. But a close reading of the evolving report shows that some entries in statistical tables were deleted from the final version.
The final report acknowledges that ''some socioeconomic, racial, ethnic and geographic differences exist.'' It says, ''There is no implication that these differences result in adverse health outcomes or imply moral error or prejudice in any way.''
But Dr. Alan R. Nelson, a former president of the American Medical Association, said a large body of evidence suggested that ''unconscious biases and stereotypes among physicians and nurses may play a role in causing racial and ethnic disparities.'' Dr. Nelson led a study of the issue by a committee of the National Academy of Sciences.
Prof. M. Gregg Bloche of Georgetown University, a member of the committee, said: ''The administration's report does not fabricate data, but misrepresents the findings. It submerges evidence of profound disparities in an optimistic message about the overall excellence of the health care system.''
Dr. Sally L. Satel, a psychiatrist and scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, said that agreeing to issue the original report, ''Secretary Thompson succumbed to political pressure that was applied by members of Congress who are identified with ethnic causes.'' Critics, she said, have grossly exaggerated the significance of changes in the report.
Among those who wanted to rewrite the report was Arthur J. Lawrence, a deputy assistant secretary of health and human services.
''The present draft remains highly focused on the health care system's supposed failings and flaws,'' Mr. Lawrence said in a memorandum to Mr. Thompson last fall. ''In short, the report lacks balance.''
Mr. Lawrence said that geography, income and other factors could be more important than race. For example, he said, whites in rural northern Maine may have worse heart problems than blacks in big cities. In addition, he said, the report should place more emphasis on ''personal responsibility for one's own health status'' and on ''problems with the medical malpractice system.''
The original version of the report included these statements, which were dropped from the final version:
*''We aspire to equality of opportunities for all our citizens. Persistent disparities in health care are inconsistent with our core values.''
*''Disparities come at a personal and societal price.''
*''Compared with whites, blacks experience longer waits in emergency departments and are more likely to leave without being seen.''
*When hospitalized for heart attacks, ''Hispanics are less likely to receive optimal care.''
The original report included a stark, prominent statement that ''black children have much higher hospitalization rates for asthma than white children.'' The final version included the data, without comment.
	A program offering tax credits to jobless workers to buy health insurance has gotten off to a slow, sputtering start, despite energetic efforts by Bush administration officials who want the program to succeed as a model for a much more ambitious effort to help the uninsured.
The program, the Health Coverage Tax Credit, was created in 2002 to aid workers who lose jobs because of foreign imports.
With health care shaping up as a big issue in this year's elections, President Bush and other Republicans see the program as an important prototype. They hope to give similar tax credits to a much larger swath of the uninsured population, which exceeds 43 million.
Administration officials have hailed the program for displaced workers. In a letter to governors last February, Treasury Secretary John W. Snow and Tommy G. Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, said the tax credit ''could help over 500,000 Americans each year.'' And Mr. Snow described it last summer as ''a real innovation in tax policy, a bold step in the direction of affordable health care for all Americans.''
But the results to date are modest, in part because displaced workers are still required to spend substantial amounts of money on insurance premiums before they can get the benefits of the tax credit.
At the end of December, the Bush administration said, only 8,374 workers were receiving tax credits for health insurance under the program. The total number of people taking advantage of the program, including dependents, is perhaps 25,000, or 5 percent of those expected to benefit.
While the program has yet to enjoy wide success, President Bush proposed wider use of tax credits in his State of the Union address on Tuesday and in his weekly radio address on Saturday.
''I ask you to give lower-income Americans a refundable tax credit that would allow millions to buy their own basic health insurance,'' Mr. Bush said in his speech to Congress.
Under the existing program, tax credits will pay 65 percent of the premium for health insurance bought by a displaced worker. The individual must pay the other 35 percent, and that has proved an insurmountable hurdle for some workers.
''The tax credit would help if the insurance rates were affordable, but the rates were so high that I couldn't afford it,'' said Gloria J. Craven, 51, of Eden, N.C. ''Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina stepped forward to help the textile workers here. But when people started getting price quotes, we realized that we could not pay our share of the premiums.''
Mrs. Craven said she and her 61-year-old husband had lost their jobs in a Pillowtex mill where they worked for three decades. She has asthma. He is diabetic and has had a heart attack. Mrs. Craven said the premiums for the insurance offered to them ranged from $1,700 to $5,400 a month. Their share of the premiums would be $595 to $1,890 a month.
The couple, drawing $416 a month in unemployment benefits, was in no position to pay such costs, Mrs. Craven said.
Federal officials estimate that 14,000 workers are eligible for the tax credit in North Carolina. Michelle Douglas, a spokeswoman for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina, said 1,800 workers had signed up for the health plan offered to displaced workers.
''There is a product available, but it's not as affordable as we had hoped,'' Ms. Douglas said.
The tax credit was approved by Congress as part of a trade bill that gave the president broad authority to negotiate trade deals.
Senator Olympia J. Snowe, Republican of Maine, one of the chief proponents of the tax credit, said: ''We have to find out immediately what's limiting the success of this program. We are talking about health insurance for people who have lost their jobs. The delays are troubling and unacceptable.''
Ms. Snowe said Maine had lost nearly one-fourth of its manufacturing jobs since 2000. Federal officials estimate that 2,000 people are eligible for the tax credit there. State officials say the number could be as high as 13,000.
But Ellen J. Schneiter, an aide to Gov. John Baldacci of Maine, a Democrat, said that fewer than 200 people were using the tax credit.
''We thought these folks were really hungry for health care coverage, but they can't pay their 35 percent share,'' Ms. Schneiter said. The premium for a family that includes a person over the age of 55 is $1,500 a month, or $18,000 a year, she said.
Federal officials said the average premium for family coverage under state-based health insurance programs was about $800 a month, or $9,600 a year.
Eligible individuals can claim the credit when they file their tax returns, or they can get it in advance, by arranging for the Treasury Department to make monthly payments to insurers. The credit is available to taxpayers and to those who do not owe federal income tax.
Roy J. Ramthun, senior adviser on health initiatives at the Treasury, said: ''We are surprised that more people have not signed up for the advance payment option. We've tried to do everything we can to make the process of qualifying for the credit as simple as possible.''
The credit is available not only to workers laid off because of foreign competition, but also to some retirees who receive payments from the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation because of the failure of their pension plans.
But so far, only 29 states have taken action to designate health plans that will provide coverage to people receiving the tax credit.
As a result, ''an eligible individual may have a 65 percent tax credit, but no place to spend it,'' said Janet S. Trautwein, vice president of the National Association of Health Underwriters.
In Texas, the federal government estimates that more than 8,600 people are eligible. But only 29 people are receiving it, according to Margaret Jarvis, a spokeswoman for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas, which operates the health plan for displaced workers.
''We expect the program to grow,'' Ms. Jarvis said, ''but there's nothing we're doing to promote it.''
In New York, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield says that fewer than 10 people are taking advantage of its program for displaced workers.
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Michigan says that more than 7,500 workers are eligible, but only 420 have signed up. The premium for a comprehensive family policy is $1,074 a month.
''If you're out of work, you might not be able to afford your share of that, $375 a month,'' said Timothy P. Cook, a spokesman for Michigan Blue Cross.
Federal officials said they had made substantial progress, setting up telephone call centers and establishing procedures for the Treasury to make monthly payments.
''We have demonstrated that the model works,'' said Ruben J. King-Shaw Jr., who ran the program for the Bush administration until he left the government in August. ''For the first time, tax credits are being used to address the problems of the uninsured. But workers are still finding out about the program. And some states have been more aggressive than others in making an insurance product available.''
The Children's Health Insurance Program, created by Congress in 1997, was also slow in getting started, federal and state officials recalled, but enrollment has increased.
In Illinois, Thomas F. Jerkovitz, executive director of the state's Comprehensive Health Insurance Plan, said he was puzzled by the fact that only 345 of the 12,000 workers eligible for the tax credit had enrolled. ''We are scratching our heads,'' Mr. Jerkovitz said.
In Ohio, 835 people have signed up. The federal government says more than 16,000 are eligible.
Ann Womer Benjamin, director of the Ohio Insurance Department, said: ''I've been a bit disappointed. This is a very positive program with great potential, but we have to do more to publicize it and to reach people who may be eligible.''
	President Bush threatened on Thursday to veto legislation that would require the government to negotiate with pharmaceutical companies to obtain lower drug prices for Medicare beneficiaries.
But chances for passage of some version of the legislation increased when a pivotal figure, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, said Congress should repeal a provision of the 2003 Medicare law that prohibits such negotiations.
The chairman, Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, said he did not favor price controls, but did believe that Medicare should be able to negotiate prices in ''discrete areas where seniors need our help the most.''
House Democrats would go further, requiring the secretary of health and human services to negotiate the prices that may be charged for most drugs covered by Medicare.
The House is scheduled to vote Friday on that proposal. While the Democratic bill is expected to pass, the White House announced the veto threat on Thursday in an effort to hold down the number of votes and to prevent the measure from gaining any more momentum.
''Government interference impedes competition, limits access to lifesaving drugs, reduces convenience for beneficiaries and ultimately increases costs to taxpayers, beneficiaries and all American citizens alike,'' the White House said in a written statement on the House bill.
Mr. Baucus said he was seeking a middle ground between Republicans, who strongly support the existing ban on federal price negotiations, and House Democratic leaders, who want to require the secretary to negotiate.
''The total prohibition on negotiation should be eliminated,'' Mr. Baucus said after listening to two and a half hours of testimony from experts at a Finance Committee hearing. Mr. Baucus is acutely sensitive to public concern about drug prices because he is up for re-election in 2008.
The debate over Medicare drug prices epitomizes the profound differences between the parties over the proper role of government in the nation's health care system. Democrats would prefer that government play a stronger role in guaranteeing access to care at lower prices. Many Republicans, on the other hand, say the market would work better if government got out of the way.
Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said the Democratic proposals were ''a stalking horse for price controls.'' In seeking a larger federal role, he said, they remind him of the Clinton administration's ill-fated plan for universal insurance coverage.
''We have enough votes to sustain a veto,'' Mr. Grassley said.
Mr. Baucus and other Senate Democrats said the government should negotiate drug prices in a few, carefully selected areas where competition had not driven down prices.
Senator Olympia J. Snowe, Republican of Maine, said Mr. Baucus's position was highly significant. ''It paves the way for the possibility'' of giving the government the authority to negotiate, she said.
On Wednesday, Ms. Snowe and Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, introduced a bill that would repeal the ban on drug price negotiations. The bill would require Medicare to help negotiate contracts for a drug if the federal government had invested a substantial amount of money in its development.
It would also require Medicare to negotiate contracts when a brand-name drug was available from only one manufacturer and no substitute or ''therapeutic equivalent'' was available.
Mr. Baucus said, ''For certain unique drugs, it seems that the prices are way too high.''
But Richard G. Frank, a professor of health economics at Harvard, said that some of these drugs ''really make a difference in people's lives.'' The drugs may be expensive, Dr. Frank said, but imposing cost controls may pose ''particular risks to precisely the research and development that should be most encouraged.''
The Congressional Research Service said that if the government negotiated lower drug prices for Medicare, pharmaceutical companies might respond by increasing prices for other buyers.
''While drug prices paid by Medicare beneficiaries may fall, overall drug prices may increase for other consumers, specifically for the under-65 population,'' the research agency said.
The White House and drug manufacturers say Medicare is such a large buyer of prescription drugs that it could, in many cases, dictate prices.
Ms. Snowe and Mr. Wyden rejected that argument. Their bill says the secretary cannot set prices or establish a uniform list of covered drugs, known as a formulary.
Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, the chief sponsor of the bill requiring federal price negotiations, said Thursday, ''The purchasing power of more than 40 million Medicare beneficiaries will allow the secretary to achieve lower prescription drug prices.''
But the Congressional Budget Office said the bill would have only ''a negligible effect on federal spending.'' Under the bill, it said, the government could not encourage Medicare beneficiaries to use particular drugs and therefore ''would lack the leverage to obtain significant discounts in negotiations with drug manufacturers.''
	With his proposal to uproot a tax break that has been in place for more than 60 years, President Bush has touched off an impassioned debate over the future of the employer-based system that provides health insurance to more than half of all Americans.
''Changing the tax code is a vital and necessary step to making health care affordable for more Americans,'' Mr. Bush said in his State of the Union address this week.
Mr. Bush said his proposal would eliminate a bias in the tax code that strongly favored insurance provided by employers over coverage bought by individuals and families outside the workplace.
Paul Fronstin, director of health research at the Employee Benefit Research Institute, a nonpartisan organization, said: ''The president's proposal would mean the end of employer-based benefits as we know them. It gives employers a way out of providing the benefits because their employees could get the same tax break on their own.''
Tony Fratto, a White House spokesman, denied that the president wanted to move people away from the employer-based system and toward the individual insurance market. ''We are seriously agnostic on that,'' he said.
It might take years for changes to occur. ''Large corporate employers could not immediately terminate their health benefits because there is, at present, no reliable place where employees can get coverage they can afford outside the workplace,'' said Frank B. McArdle, a health policy expert at Hewitt Associates, a benefits consulting firm.
The economic rationale for Mr. Bush's proposal is that too many people have ''gold-plated, deluxe'' health insurance, which encourages them to use excessive amounts of health care, driving up costs for everyone.
Many economists agree. But they doubt that Mr. Bush's proposal would do much to hold down costs or cover more people.
''The president's proposal addresses inequities in the tax code that provide an open-ended subsidy for premiums paid by employers,'' said Robert D. Reischauer, a former director of the Congressional Budget Office. ''If your employer does not provide health insurance and you have to buy it on your own, you get no tax benefit at all. The president's plan would eliminate that distinction.''
But Mr. Reischauer said, ''A glaring problem with the president's plan is that he did not call for any stronger regulation of the individual insurance market.'' In that market as it now exists in most states, insurers can deny coverage or charge higher rates to sick people.
In their desire to achieve universal coverage, some Democrats have also begun to raise questions about the employer-based system. ''We have to ask ourselves if the employer-based system of health care is still the best way for providing insurance to all Americans,'' said Senator Barack Obama, Democrat of Illinois, noting that workers frequently changed jobs.
The Service Employees International Union negotiates with employers to secure health benefits for its members, but the president of the union, Andrew L. Stern, said, ''The current employer-based health care system is not the foundation for 21st-century health care reform.''
Mr. Bush's proposal differs radically from President Bill Clinton's plan for universal coverage, but experts on health benefits said they were similar in one respect: In an effort to help the uninsured -- about one-sixth of the population -- they would upend the system that covers most Americans.
The Clinton plan would have provided comprehensive health benefits to 39 million uninsured Americans, with more than $400 billion in new federal spending over 10 years. The White House says the tax changes proposed by Mr. Bush would provide coverage for 3 million to 5 million people at no cost to the government over 10 years.
Since Mr. Bush took office in 2001, the number of people without insurance has increased by more than 5 million, to 46.6 million, according to the Census Bureau. Administration officials said they hoped to reverse that trend by helping states that offered basic private insurance policies to their residents. To pay for such help, the administration would take federal money from hospitals that serve large numbers of poor people.
Under Mr. Bush's proposal, employee health benefits would, for the first time, be treated as income and would be subject to income and payroll taxes, just like wages. At the same time, Mr. Bush would create a tax deduction for health insurance of $15,000 for families and $7,500 for individuals. The same deduction would be available to everyone with coverage, regardless of the source or value of the policy.
A family with coverage worth $18,000 would have to pay taxes on the amount exceeding the $15,000 standard deduction -- $3,000, in this example.
Katherine Baicker, a member of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, said the proposal would increase taxes for 30 million people with the most generous employer-provided health benefits, unless they ''change their behavior'' and choose less costly coverage. Ms. Baicker said the proposal would cut taxes for more than 100 million people who bought insurance on their own or had employee health benefits worth less than the standard deduction.
Treasury officials said that under the Bush proposal, an uninsured family of four with an annual income of $60,000 would save $4,545 if it bought coverage in the individual market. By contrast, they said, a family that earns $80,000 and has employer-provided coverage worth $20,000 could see a tax increase of about $1,500.
Joel D. Kaplan, deputy chief of staff at the White House, acknowledged that the proposal could accelerate the trend of employers' dropping health benefits for employees. But he said more people ''would be able to buy insurance in the individual market,'' so there would be ''a net increase in the number of insured.''
Politicians and health care providers are skeptical.
Representative John D. Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who is the chairman of the Committee on Energy and Commerce, said, ''The president's proposal would do little to help the uninsured, but would undermine the employer-based system through which 160 million people get coverage.''
Richard J. Umbdenstock, president of the American Hospital Association, agreed. ''The tax proposal would have the effect of driving people to the small-group insurance market -- a market that has proved unstable,'' Mr. Umbdenstock said. ''For many people, even with a tax break, coverage would remain unaffordable.''
Historically, employers have used benefits as a tool to recruit workers and keep them healthy and productive.
R. Bruce Josten, executive vice president of the United States Chamber of Commerce, praised the general direction of the president's proposal but said his members had serious concerns.
First, Mr. Josten said, the $15,000 cap on tax-free insurance takes no account of wide geographic variation in the cost of health care and insurance. The same package of benefits typically costs more in Boston than in Minneapolis, for example.
Moreover, Mr. Josten said, a health plan may be expensive because it covers older workers with major medical problems, not because it is ''gold-plated.'' A single mother, working as a low-paid secretary at a law firm, could be pushed into a higher tax bracket because she participates in an $18,000 health plan covering older men who have had heart attacks and expensive surgery, Mr. Josten said.
Treasury officials acknowledged that some people with costly, comprehensive benefits had modest incomes.
But deluxe health plans are vanishingfast. In recent years, many workers have found themselves paying more for less comprehensive benefits. From 2000 to 2006, premiums for employer-sponsored coverage rose 87 percent, about four times as fast as workers' earnings, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.
	Within days of convening, the new Congress will return to some of the biggest battles of the last decade as House Democrats try to rush through legislation requiring the government to negotiate lower drug prices for Medicare beneficiaries and overturning President Bush's restrictions on embryonic stem cell research.
The Medicare proposal highlights the profound differences between Democrats and Republicans over the future of the nation's health care system, the proper role of government and the role of private markets in securing the best value for the huge sums spent on health care.
State officials say they wish Congress would focus on a more immediate problem: money for the Children's Health Insurance Program, which provides coverage for four million low-income children, is running out in more than a dozen states.
Dr. Rhonda M. Medows, commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Health, said, ''Our program will run out of federal money in March, and all 260,000 children in the program will lose their health care coverage if Congress fails to act.''
In debating the future of the children's health program, which has broad bipartisan support, Congress will take up proposals to cover some of the 46 million people who have no health insurance.
Dr. Mark B. McClellan, former administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said, ''Congress should consider expanding the Children's Health Insurance Program to low-income adults.'' Many Democrats agree. But even modest proposals may collide with Democratic efforts to restore fiscal discipline and to reduce the federal budget deficit.
Congress convenes on Thursday. Representative Nancy Pelosi, the California Democrat who is in line to be speaker, has said the House will, in its first 100 hours, vote on bills to authorize drug price negotiations under Medicare and to expand federal financing of stem cell research.
Representative Tom Allen, Democrat of Maine, said he was ''giddy'' at the prospect of being able to legislate on health care after toiling for 10 years in the minority. ''People in Maine find it incomprehensible that the Medicare law has a provision that forbids negotiation of lower prices,'' said Mr. Allen, who introduced a bill to give beneficiaries access to drug discounts negotiated by the government in 1998.
By adding a drug benefit to Medicare in 2003, Congress authorized the biggest expansion of the program since its creation in 1965. The drug benefit, unlike most Medicare benefits, is delivered entirely by private insurers subsidized by the government. The insurers negotiate with drug manufacturers to obtain discounts, often in return for promoting the use of particular drugs. The 2003 law prohibits the government from interfering in those negotiations and stipulates that Medicare cannot establish a list of preferred drugs.
Most Democrats want to repeal the ban on price negotiations. Wendell E. Primus, an aide to Ms. Pelosi, said the Democratic proposal would require the secretary of health and human services to negotiate, but would not specify how.
''It will be very simple language,'' Mr. Primus said. ''We do not think that Congress needs to hammer out all the details. There are a lot of smart people in the administration, including the secretary, who can look at how we're buying drugs -- the Medicaid program, the Department of Defense, vaccines, et cetera -- and figure out the best way of negotiating better prices with drug companies.''
Republicans said they welcomed the opportunity to debate the issue. The House Republican leader, Representative John A. Boehner of Ohio, said the Democrats' proposal would ''take a wrecking ball to a popular program that has cut drug costs for consumers through competition.'' Such competition, he said, ''has kept prices lower than anyone expected.''
Administration officials suggested that Mr. Bush would veto a bill calling for price negotiations. Democrats could then exploit the issue in the 2008 campaign, as they did in the midterm elections.
Under a bill introduced in 2005 by several House Democrats, Medicare would offer a government-run drug plan, in addition to all the plans offered by private insurance companies, and federal officials would negotiate with drug manufacturers on the prices of drugs covered by the government plan.
But aides to Ms. Pelosi said House Democratic leaders now wanted to go further. Under their proposal, the government would negotiate on behalf of all people in Medicare drug plans, more than 22.5 million people.
House Democrats assume that if the government negotiates lower drug prices, the savings will automatically be passed on to beneficiaries in the form of lower premiums. But they could not immediately say how they would guarantee that result. In the absence of detailed instructions from Congress, lower drug prices could mean lower costs and higher profits for the insurers that operate Medicare drug plans.
Michael O. Leavitt, the secretary of health and human services, said he did not want the power to negotiate. ''I don't believe I can do a better job than an efficient market,'' Mr. Leavitt said in an interview.
Leslie V. Norwalk, acting administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said that under the Democrats' proposal her agency would have to ''hire hundreds of people to negotiate prices for 4,500 different drugs.'' And Ms. Norwalk said the agency would be besieged by lobbyists seeking higher Medicare payments for specific drugs. That, she said, is ''how Washington really works.''
Senator Max Baucus, the Montana Democrat who is in line to become chairman of the Finance Committee, helped shape the 2003 law. In March, he voted against a proposal to authorize drug price negotiations. But Mr. Baucus, who is up for re-election in 2008, said he had an open mind and would hold hearings on the idea.
Kate Leone, an aide to the Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, said Senate Democrats had the same legislative priorities as House Democrats, but were not committed to the 100-hour schedule.
Mr. Primus said the new Congress would also ''give the president another chance to veto a stem cell bill,'' like the one he vetoed in July.
In campaign commercials in 2006, Democrats and some Republicans boasted of their support for embryonic stem cell research as a way to find treatments for a wide range of diseases. Advocates of such research say that, despite gains in the elections, they still do not have the votes to override a veto. They are working with Senate allies on a plan to attach the stem cell bill to unrelated legislation that Mr. Bush would feel obliged to sign.
Lawmakers are also likely to wrestle with these issues:
Many Democrats will try to reduce Medicare payments to managed care plans. They contend such plans are overpaid by about 10 percent. Insurers intend to fight back, with support from the Bush administration, Republican lawmakers and beneficiaries who see the plans as a way to obtain extra benefits at an affordable cost.
Congress faces a huge challenge in devising a new formula to pay doctors for treating Medicare patients. Under the current formula, doctors' fees would be cut more than 4 percent a year for the next decade. Lawmakers are determined to avert such cuts, but see no easy way to pay the cost.
Democrats have drafted legislation to speed the approval of safe, low-cost versions of expensive biotechnology drugs, which account for a growing share of spending on pharmaceuticals.
People who pay for health care, including state officials, employers and insurers, support such legislationas a way to slow spending on biotech drugs, which can cost more than $10,000 a year. Biotech companies argue that their products, made from living organisms, are so complex that they cannot be exactly duplicated by generic drug manufacturers. As a result, they say, a ''copy'' would rarely be interchangeable with the original.
The Food and Drug Administration has approved thousands of generic drugs deemed equivalent to traditional brand-name medicines. But the agency is unsure of its legal authority to approve such versions of biotech drugs.
	