As the baby boomers age, more and more Americans will either be enduring chronic pain or taking care of someone in pain. The Republican Party has been reaching out to them with a two-step plan:
1. Do not give patients medicine to ease their pain.
2. If they are in great pain and near death, do not let them put an end to their misery.
The Republicans have been so determined to become the Pain Party that they've brushed aside their traditional belief in states' rights. The Bush administration wants lawyers in Washington and federal prosecutors with no medical training to tell doctors how to treat patients.
As attorney general, John Ashcroft decided that Oregon's law allowing physician-assisted suicide violated the federal Controlled Substances Act because he didn't consider this use of drugs to be a ''legitimate medical purpose.'' Karen Tandy, the head of the Drug Enforcement Administration, has been using this same legal theory to decree how doctors should medicate patients with pain, and those who disagree with her medical judgment can be sent to prison.
You know Republicans have lost their bearings when they need a lesson in states' rights from Janet Reno, who considered the Oregon law when she was attorney general. For the federal government to decide what constituted legitimate medicine, she wrote, would wrongly ''displace the states as the primary regulators of the medical profession.''
The Supreme Court agreed with her this week in upholding the Oregon law. In the majority opinion, Justice Anthony Kennedy said the federal drug law did not empower the attorney general ''to define general standards of medical practice.'' It merely ''bars doctors from using their prescription-writing powers as a means to engage in illicit drug dealing and trafficking as conventionally understood.''
That's news to the D.E.A. and the federal prosecutors, who have gone way beyond any ''conventionally understood'' idea of drug trafficking. They've been prosecuting doctors for prescribing painkillers like OxyContin, even where there's no evidence of any of the drugs being resold on the streets. It doesn't matter that the doctor genuinely believed that the patient needed the drugs and was not abusing them. It doesn't matter that the patient was in pain.
No, doctors are now going to prison merely for prescribing more pain pills than the D.E.A. and prosecutors deem a ''legitimate medical purpose.'' These drug warriors are not troubled by the enormous range in the level of pain medication that different patients need.
They don't even seem to worry much about the potency of the pills, just the number. They want enough pills of any dosage to make a good photo at a press conference. In some cases, doctors have been too careless or gullible, but those are offenses to be disciplined by state medical authorities, not criminal courts.
Tandy claims that only a few corrupt doctors have anything to fear from the D.E.A. She responded to a column of mine last year by saying that her agency had investigated only 0.1 percent of the 600,000 doctors in the U.S. But she was far too modest. Most doctors, after all, write few if any prescriptions for opioid painkillers.
The doctors who matter are the small number of specialists in pain treatment who prescribe opioids. Ronald Libby, a professor of political science at the University of North Florida, estimates that 17 percent of those doctors were investigated during one year by the D.E.A., and an even greater number of others were investigated by local and state authorities, typically in concert with the drug agency. That means a pain specialist might have a one-in-three chance of being investigated for prescribing opioids.
Faced with those odds, doctors are understandably afraid. As noted in The New England Journal of Medicine this month, the D.E.A. has made doctors reluctant to give opioids to desperately ill patients, even when these drugs are the most effective pain treatment. The article warned that a victory for the Bush administration in the Oregon case, besides affecting terminally ill patients in Oregon, could cause doctors across the country to ''abandon patients and their families in their moment of greatest need.''
The Supreme Court's decision is a victory for patients and their doctors -- including, I hope, some of the ones in prison for violating the federal legal theory that has now been rejected by the court. The doctors should go free, and Republicans in the White House and Congress should restrain the drug warriors who locked them up. When this year's budget is drawn up, it's the D.E.A.'s turn to feel pain.
Op-Ed Columnist
	With Friends Like These
WHY have the Democratic presidential candidates been so reluctant to attack one another? Maybe because they have been too busy watching their backs. Treachery has always been part of politics, but this seems destined to be remembered as the Year of the Rat.
It was shocking enough when Gerald W. McEntee, the president of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, publicly withdrew his endorsement of Howard Dean while the candidate was still planning a last stand in Wisconsin. Then, after Dr. Dean lost Wisconsin and gracefully left the race on Wednesday, Mr. McEntee sent his version of condolences the next day. In lieu of flowers, he offered a public testimonial to Dr. Dean: ''I think he's nuts.''
Of course, Mr. McEntee was not the first. That distinction may belong to Chris Lehane, who after advising John Kerry last year went on to attack him while working for Gen. Wesley K. Clark. But at least he was advancing the cause of his current candidate. Steven Grossman was still chairman of the Dean campaign on Sunday, just before the Wisconsin primary, when he announced he would be switching his support to Mr. Kerry if Dr. Dean lost Tuesday.
Aides to Mr. Clark helped nudge their candidate out of the race more subtly by leaking a tip that the campaign would be folding. You could think of this as a modern version of the old vaudeville approach to failing acts, with the leaks serving as the equivalent of the hook dragging the performers off stage. Or you could use a Vietnam metaphor, as John J. Pitney Jr. does in his book ''The Art of Political Warfare.''
''Whereas soldiers in Vietnam did their 'fragging' with hand grenades, bureaucrats and political aides can do it with leaks to the press,'' writes Dr. Pitney, a professor of government at Claremont McKenna College in California. After watching this year's aides in action, he has come up with a new term for the trend: pre-emptive surrender.
''It's a bizarro version of the Bush doctrine of pre-emption,'' Dr. Pitney said. ''Waging political warfare is hard when the troops behind you are waving white flags. It's as if you're General Grant at Shiloh and you notice that your chief lieutenants are practicing their Southern accents.''
Candidate, Heal Thyself
IN general, the presidential candidates favor safe and healthy working conditions for Americans. Just not for themselves and their staffs.
No one this year looks quite as haggard as Bill Clinton did in 1992, when he gained 20 pounds and was constantly battling colds and allergies, but they have had their travails. Mr. Kerry said the campaign felt like one long exam week in college because of all the cold pizza, junk food and all-nighters. John Edwards got bronchitis and lost his voice. Dr. Dean lost his voice, too, and not simply because of that scream.
On Monday evening, as Dr. Dean was standing in the Orpheum Theater in Madison, Wis., after addressing the last rally before the primary, he was asked for his professional medical assessment of the hazards of political campaigning.
''Atrocious eating habits,'' he said, ''which have put 12 pounds on me in two years.'' This would not come as a surprise to anyone who traveled on his Gulfstream jet, perpetually equipped with bowls of peanut M&M's and trays of brownies and cookies.
''The lack of sleep generally doesn't have that much of an effect on me,'' he said. ''I encourage people on my staff to take time off, but that's not easy to do on a campaign. We could run a reasonable schedule, but I don't.''
But doesn't the doctor in you want to encourage healthy behavior?
''Yeah, but the workaholic in me wants to drive through until I win.''
If the campaign ends tomorrow, would it at least be good for your health?
''It's not going to end,'' he said, and he almost seemed to believe it.
An Arms Race Of Oratory
IT was being billed as the most important speech of John Edwards's life, a chance to celebrate his surprisingly strong second-place finish in Wisconsin and reach those across America who would be voting Super Tuesday. But after uttering 10 sentences Tuesday night, he was suddenly abandoned by the cable networks, who switched to cover the start of John Kerry's victory speech.
Did Mr. Kerry deliberately silence his silver-tongued rival? ''We cannot claim that kind of genius,'' said David Wade, Mr. Kerry's spokesman, who blamed election-night confusion. But however it happened, it set a tempting precedent for future election nights. To deprive your rival of free national television exposure, just wait for him to go first and then upstage him. In crowded races, you could end up with an arms race mentality leading to five candidates speaking at once, a loss for voters, viewers and networks eager for live drama.
No one can force the candidates to stagger their speeches, but there might be a way to restore some order. Suppose one (or two or three) of the networks announced before Super Tuesday that it would not reward upstagers. Once a candidate began speaking, it would stick with him for, say, five minutes (or until he became boring). If someone else came on in that time, his speech would be taped and shown afterwards.
The proposal was not an immediate hit with the networks. ''Obviously we'd like to avoid making a choice between Kerry and Edwards,'' said Tom Hannon, the political director of CNN. ''But I'm not sure we're ready to set up ground rules for the candidates.''
Tammy Haddad, the executive producer of ''Hardball'' on NBC, did not dismiss the idea out of hand but warned it could be stifling. ''Part of the reason people watch election-night coverage is the messiness,'' she said.
Mr. Wade, the Kerry spokesman, diplomatically called it ''an interesting idea.'' The most enthusiasm came from Jennifer Palmieri, Mr. Edwards's spokeswoman.
''That sounds like a very fair way to do it,'' she said, looking ahead to Super Tuesday. ''I would never start with the assumption that the Kerry campaign would be snarky next time, but it would be nice to have a policy so that there's no incentive for anyone to game the system.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
	If you were a Democrat watching Coretta Scott King's funeral, you could congratulate yourself on the party's role in past civil rights struggles. But if you saw what's been on television in Milwaukee in the past month, you'd wonder what's become of your party.
Gov. Jim Doyle, a Democrat, looks like public enemy No. 1 for African-American schoolchildren. ''He's throwing away my dream,'' one Milwaukee student says in a TV commercial supporting the city's school voucher program for low-income families. Another commercial shows a black father on the verge of tears saying: ''School choice is good enough for the governor's family. I ought to be able to have it, too.''
Radio audiences have been hearing an ad calling the voucher battle ''one of the greatest social justice issues we have in the country.'' The speaker is Ken Johnson, an African-American who leads Milwaukee's school board.
You read that correctly: the head of the public school board supports giving students in his system a chance to escape public schools. That would be unthinkable in most cities, but Milwaukee's voucher program has been so successful over the past 15 years that it's won a wide array of converts -- except among the Democrats terrified of teachers' unions.
The governor repeatedly vetoed bills passed by Republican legislators who were trying to head off a problem that became official yesterday: there aren't enough vouchers for all the students who want them. The original law limited the number of vouchers to 15 percent of the city's public school enrollment -- which works out to almost 15,000 vouchers -- but the program has grown beyond that limit.
So the state announced a rationing plan yesterday that would deny vouchers next year to thousands of students, many of them already using vouchers to attend private schools. These students and their parents have been appearing in television commercials, paid for by a pro-voucher group, and showing up at the State Capitol carrying signs reading, ''Governor Doyle, Don't Cap My Future.''
The pressure has worked. The governor and the Republicans have negotiated a last-minute deal -- expected to be enacted shortly -- to stave off the rationing plan by allotting extra vouchers. That would spare the Democrats from the immediate prospect of kicking black children out of private schools.
But it still leaves the party in Wisconsin and elsewhere with long-term problems. How long will blacks vote for a party that opposes the voucher programs they strongly favor? And how can Democratic leaders keep preaching their devotion to public schools while sending their own children to private schools, as Governor Doyle does? He's what I call a Lypsy, an acronym for Let Your People Stay.
Doyle told me that he wasn't bothered by the personal attacks, and that he had compromised only to avoid disrupting students' education. He said he was still philosophically opposed to vouchers and didn't fear reprisals from black voters. ''I don't think this is an issue that moves voters,'' he said, arguing that blacks distrust Republicans on too many other issues.
He may be right -- for now. Howard Fuller, a prominent advocate for vouchers as well as a former superintendent of Milwaukee's public schools, told me he hadn't seen the popularity of the voucher program translate into much affection for Republicans among his fellow African-Americans, especially his civil rights comrades.
''Those people you saw at Coretta Scott King's funeral are not going to change,'' he said. ''My generation pushed for social change through government solutions, but younger blacks are much more interested in private initiatives. They understand that the public school system cannot by itself be the solution to educating low-income children.''
One of those younger blacks is Jason Fields, a first-term state legislator who has defied his fellow Democrats by supporting vouchers. ''If the Democratic Party is supposed to be the party of the little guy, where do we get off opposing a chance to help those with the least of all?'' he asked. The answer he's heard from his party is that supporting vouchers can end your career if the teachers' union supports a candidate against you in the Democratic primary.
But Fields, who represents a predominantly black district in Milwaukee, is that rare Democrat who will stand up for his constituents against the union. ''If they run someone against me, so be it,'' Fields said. ''I'm willing to leave it up to the voters to decide who really cares about African-Americans, and who's just spitting out rhetoric.''
Op-Ed Columnist
	All Tax Talk, No Action?
HOW many Democratic tax plans can dance on the head of a pin?
While the presidential candidates are out in Iowa passionately debating precisely which parts of the Bush tax cuts they will repeal, back in Washington some observers consider it an oddly hypothetical exercise. Virtually no one on Capitol Hill expects the Democrats to win control of Congress in November. So how much chance would any Democratic president have of persuading a Republican majority in either chamber to increase taxes next year?
''The answer is zero,'' said Senator Charles E. Grassley, the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the finance committee. ''Only 3 or 4 of the 10 Democrats on my committee would vote to get rid of the tax cuts. None of the Republicans would.''
''It's about as likely as Hillary Clinton becoming a Republican,'' replied John Feehery, a spokesman for Speaker J. Dennis Hastert of Illinois.
''No chance,'' said Grover G. Norquist, a leading Republican strategist and the president of Americans for Tax Reform, which has secured pledges from nearly half of the members of Congress not to raise taxes.
Like other conservatives, Mr. Norquist predicts that Democratic tax policy will play badly in the campaign, but he still does not forecast an easy Republican victory in November. No matter which Democrat is nominated, he said, the candidate can benefit from other pocketbook issues that a Democratic president could actually do something about: trade policy, tort reform and privatization of federal jobs.
''The Democrats could win because their base has more at stake economically than the Republican base,'' Mr. Norquist said. ''The unions know that four more years of Bush will mean a huge number of union jobs lost to new free-trade agreements and the outsourcing of the federal work force. Even modest tort reform could cost the trial lawyers tens of billions of dollars. It's perfectly reasonable to think that Democratic groups will spend $400 million on this election. If their team doesn't win, they don't eat.''
Ye Sushi-Eating Body Piercers!
IOWANS have just discovered your role in the vast left-wing conspiracy. They even know about your passions for eating sushi and sticking pins through your flesh. The Club for Growth, a conservative group, has put you in a $100,000 advertising campaign in Iowa. The group's attack advertisement, which made its debut on Des Moines television on Wednesday, shows a husband and wife talking about Howard Dean's proposal to repeal the Bush tax cuts.
''Howard Dean,'' the husband says, ''should take his tax-hiking, government-expanding, latte-drinking, sushi-eating, Volvo-driving, New-York-Times-reading'' -- at which point the wife interrupts to finish the sentence -- ''body-piercing, Hollywood-loving, left-wing freak show back to Vermont, where it belongs.''
Could this really be you, gentle reader? Given that about half of the Times's circulation is in the New York metropolitan area, a heavily Democratic region, it may be reasonable to guess that a majority of readers vote Democratic. But Catherine J. Mathis, a spokeswoman for The Times, said the newspaper itself did not know the political affiliation of its readers -- much less their preferences in coffee and Japanese food.
Stephen Moore, the president of the Club for Growth, said the commercial was not based on market research about Times readers. In fact, the original script had ''NPR-listening'' instead, he said, but he changed it to Times-reading to appeal to Iowans angered by a Times editorial suggesting the presidential campaign would improve if candidates skipped the Iowa's caucuses.
''We're trying to present an image of Northeast liberals,'' Mr. Moore said. But as a resident of Washington, doesn't he fit some of the stereotypes himself? What about sushi?
''I don't eat sushi,'' Mr. Moore said. ''I don't drive a Volvo. I don't read The Times -- except for the Political Points column, of course. I don't drink latte. I do have my navel pierced, though.''
Labels 'n' Labels For Red 'n' Blue
FOR a more scientific breakdown of America's electoral divide, you can choose from two new surveys identifying yet more groups for candidates to worry about.
Republicans can now break their base into categories like Country Folk (whites outside metropolitan areas), The Faithful (born-again Christian fundamentalists and other Protestants) and Privileged Men (white college graduates). Those labels come from ''The Two Americas,'' a new book by Stanley B. Greenberg, the pollster who guided Bill Clinton.
Mr. Greenberg breaks the Democratic base into categories like Secular Warriors (people who rarely attend church and do not own a gun) and Cosmopolitan States (New England, New York, New Jersey and California). While Super-Educated Women (those with postgraduate degrees) are reliable Democrats, men with postgraduate degrees are more fickle. Other groups up for grabs include Devout Catholics (white non-Hispanic Catholics who attend Mass weekly), Aging Blues (men or women over 50 without college degrees) and the Young and the Restless (whites under 30).
In a separate poll analyzing the blue-red divide, Zogby International has identified two other groups that vote Republican: people who attend high school sports events and people who attend Little League games. This was called the division between Hometown Values and Hollywood Values by The O'Leary Report, the conservative publication that conducted the poll along with Zogby and Southern Methodist University.
The poll also found that groups called the Defenders (people whose family includes a current or retired member of the military) and Wealth-Builders (those with stocks or 401(k) plans) are significantly more likely to vote Republican.
Like Mr. Greenberg's poll, the Zogby survey found that Democrats go to church a lot less often than Republicans do. If you believe that new commercial in Iowa, you might wonder if this is because Democrats are too busy on Sunday morning reading the paper. But that theory has not yet been investigated.
Purple Heart Award
Some might have relished the chance to snipe at a rival, but not Steve Murphy, the manager of Richard A. Gephardt's campaign. ''We have been friends a long time and it is with a heavy heart that I write this letter,'' he began a missive on Thursday to Joe Trippi, the manager of the Dean campaign, that accused him of trying to sneak out-of-staters into the Iowa caucuses. Mr. Trippi promptly replied with a letter of rebuttal telling how saddened he was by the ''sleazy tactics'' of Mr. Murphy, and concluding that ''it is with a particularly heavy heart that I send this letter.'' Whose heart tips the scales? Let them sadly share the honor.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
	Best and Worst Of the Primaries
At the risk of disappointing Representative Dennis J. Kucinich and the Rev. Al Sharpton, we're going to assume that the peak of the Democratic Party's primary season is behind us. So let's present the Primary Honors.
WORST PHOTO OP -- Was it when Howard Dean put on a cheesehead in Wisconsin, or the moment he indulged some strange Iowa tradition by allowing a milkshake to be poured into a glass balanced on his head? Call it a tie. Either way, the political lesson is clear: Avoid dairy products.
BEST PHOTO OP -- Senator John Kerry's reunion in Iowa with a veteran who credited him for saving his life in Vietnam was the emotional high point of the Kerry primary campaign. But there was one even more valuable photo opportunity generously provided by the White House advance team. To rouse an audience, a Democratic candidate had merely to mention the scene of Mr. Bush ''playing dress-up'' while ''prancing'' on that aircraft carrier with the ''Mission Accomplished'' banner.
WORST SOUND BITE -- Dr. Dean took an early lead in this race and never gave it up. First, there was the line about pickups with Confederate flags, then the announcement that America was no safer after Saddam Hussein's capture. The award seemed assured at a town hall meeting when he told a 67-year-old Iowan: ''You sit down. You've had your say, and now I'm going to have my say.'' But then came the Scream, the standard against which all bad sound bites will henceforth be measured.
BEST SOUND BITE -- Another gift from Mr. Bush. Even at the most lackluster rally, Mr. Kerry could count on the crowd chanting along when he used the president's own words against him: ''Bring it on!''
WORST QUESTION -- John Edwards gave the same boring answer at every stop, but reporters never stopped asking it anyway: ''Are you running for vice president?''
BEST QUESTION -- When James P. Hoffa, the president of the Teamsters union, appeared on MSNBC's ''Hardball'' to explain his endorsement of Mr. Kerry, he said he was not troubled by Mr. Kerry's opposition to drilling for oil in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Although the Teamsters had wanted those drilling jobs in Alaska, Mr. Hoffa said he had been assured there would be more jobs created by other drilling projects around the United States. He quoted Mr. Kerry telling him, ''We're going to drill like never before.''
What could possibly have caused a fervent environmentalist like Mr. Kerry to promise more drilling than the Bush administration allows now? Chris Matthews, the amused host, promptly raised one theory.
''What position was he in when he made all these promises?'' Mr. Matthews asked the Teamsters leader.
Mr. Hoffa, unfortunately, did not reply.
WORST ANSWER -- Before he entered the race in September, political veterans advised Gen. Wesley K. Clark to practice every day answering a barrage of questions from aides pretending to be reporters. But the day after he announced his candidacy, he was stumped when a reporter on his plane asked the most obvious question: Would he have voted in Congress to authorize the Iraq war? First, General Clark said he probably would have. Then he said he wouldn't have. Then he looked to the front of the plane, where his press secretary, Mary Jacoby, was sitting, and came up with the answer that probably expressed his true inner feelings: ''Mary, help!''
BEST ANSWER -- It came last Sunday in response to the trickiest question posed to the Democrats during their debates: Is God on America's side in the war against terror? The first respondent, Mr. Kerry, started out awkwardly -- ''Well, God will, look, I think, I believe in God'' -- and went on to dodge it. Then it was John Edwards's turn.
''Well, there's a wonderful story about Abraham Lincoln during the middle of the Civil War,'' Mr. Edwards said, going on to tell about a group of leaders who asked Lincoln to join them in praying that God was on the Union's side. ''Abraham Lincoln's response was, 'I won't join you in that prayer, but I'll join you in a prayer that we're on God's side.' ''
It's hard to recall the last presidential debate featuring such a perfect ad-lib, although other politicians (or at least their speechwriters) have previously borrowed Lincoln's line. President George Bush quoted it in a 1991 speech to Christian educators. In 1988, President Ronald Reagan told of a rally at Madison Square Garden during World War II at which various celebrities proclaimed God to be on America's side, whereupon the boxer Joe Louis proclaimed that America would win because it was on God's side.
''There was just a hushed moment of silence,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''and then that crowd came to their feet with just about the most heartfelt applause and ovation that anyone has ever heard. The master of ceremonies was the comedian George Jessel, and George said, 'Joe, you have just laid a rose on Abraham Lincoln's grave.' '' He would have been impressed with Mr. Edwards, too.
Political Points  Correction:  March 20, 2004, Saturday  A report in the Political Points column on March 7 about a response by Senator John Edwards during a presidential debate incorporated an anecdote in which President Ronald Reagan in 1988 misidentified the person who praised the boxer Joe Louis at an event during World War II. Louis proclaimed that America would win the war because it was on God's side. The master of ceremonies, who praised Louis, was the former mayor of New York, Jimmy Walker, not, as Mr. Reagan said, the comedian George Jessel.
	Democrats once went to court to desegregate schools. But in Florida they've been fighting to kick black students out of integrated schools, and they've succeeded, thanks to the Democratic majority on the State Supreme Court.
The court's decision on Thursday was a legally incoherent but politically creative solution to a delicate problem. Ever since Florida's pioneering statewide voucher program began, Democrats have been struggling to deal with the program's success.
Most of recipients have been black students like Adrian Bushell, whom I wrote about last year. Without a voucher, he would have attended Miami Edison, a big public high school in a poor area with a 94 percent black student body and a total of six non-Hispanic white students.
Instead, he's now a 10th grader at Monsignor Edward Pace, a Catholic school that is 24 percent black. His experience is typical. In other places that have tried vouchers, like Milwaukee and Cleveland, studies have shown that voucher recipients tend to move to less segregated schools.
Besides helping Adrian (who's got a 3.1 average and plans on college), the Florida program has also benefited students in public schools like Miami Edison. Because each voucher is worth less than what the public system spends per student, more money is left for each student in the public system. And studies have repeatedly shown that failing Florida schools facing voucher competition have raised their test scores more than schools not facing the voucher threat.
A program that desegregates schools and improves test scores wasn't easy to attack in the Legislature, but the courts offered a more promising battleground for the teachers' unions trying to stop it. Florida's Constitution has a version of the Blaine Amendment, a ban on aid to religious institutions that might be construed in some states (but not in others) to prohibit school vouchers.
A lower court in Florida ruled that the voucher program violated the ban on religious aid. The State Supreme Court could have simply affirmed that conclusion, which would have been legally defensible (although mistaken, in my view). But then it would have faced a messy new set of questions.
If the Blaine Amendment prohibited vouchers, couldn't it also prohibit the state aid now going to hospitals, colleges and preschool programs run by religious institutions? Would the court have to end programs that were popular with the public and inoffensive to Democratic teachers' unions?
The judges ducked these inconvenient questions by ignoring the Blaine Amendment and using another rationale. They ruled that the voucher program violated a state constitutional requirement to provide a ''uniform'' system of public schools.
The majority's decision was eviscerated in a dissent by two Republican judges who use adjectives like ''nonsensical'' to describe the legal reasoning. The dissenters argue persuasively that nothing in the Constitution forbids the Legislature from setting up other programs beyond the public school system.
The decision has disillusioned Adrian and his grandmother, Ramona Nickson. ''I just don't even want to think of sending him back to public school,'' she said. Other parents in Florida worry that more programs are in jeopardy, like the scholarships given to thousands of disabled students in private schools. Or the many charter schools in the state, which may not suit the judges' personal vision of a ''uniform'' system.
''It's difficult to predict what will happen next after a decision as devoid of legal principle as this one,'' said Clark Neily of the Institute for Justice, which represented the voucher recipients in the case. ''The judges decided what decision they wanted to reach and worked backward from there.''
Adrian was supported by the Urban League of Miami and other advocacy groups for blacks and Latinos, but not the N.A.A.C.P. It abandoned him -- and the majority of African-Americans, who favor school vouchers -- and sided with the teachers' unions.
The group that once battled the segregationists' fiction of ''separate but equal'' schools signed on to the legal fiction that there's something admirably ''uniform'' about a public school monopoly that keeps students in Adrian's neighborhood trapped in a segregated, inferior school.
It's sad to see the N.A.A.C.P. working to keep them there, but it's not surprising now that the group is virtually an arm of the Democratic Party. The unions dominating that party have no qualms about sending Adrian back to a segregated school that has just lost its chief incentive to improve. The party now has a new educational motto: separate but uniform.
Op-Ed Columnist
	