Howard Dean may be hinging his candidacy on Wisconsin, but a growing number of Democrats say if he cannot win the Washington caucuses here on Saturday, he should take that as a cue and bow out.
''If he can't win here, he can't win anywhere,'' said Cathy Allen, a Democratic strategist in Seattle unaffiliated with any campaign.
If any place should still count as Howard Dean country, it would be here.Seattle is where the former Vermont governor began to build his base more than a year ago, where he drew more than 8,000 people to a rally downtown last summer and where his antiwar message fueled the political fervor for which this liberal city is known.
Washington State, much less liberal as a whole than Seattle, also has a traditional inclination toward underdogs and unpredictable outcomes. In the 1992 caucuses, Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts ran far ahead of the pack, with Bill Clinton finishing fourth, although the state also held a primary that year that Mr. Clinton won.
In 1984, Senator Gary Hart of Colorado scored a victory with Democrats here, and in 1988, the Rev. Jesse Jackson made one of his strongest showings, slightly behind Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts.
Dr. Dean has raised almost as much money in this state as all his rivals combined, $679,842 since declaring his candidacy, according to the Center for Public Integrity, a nonpartisan organization. Dr. Dean has repeatedly made optimistic predictions about Washington, where he made several appearances on Tuesday and Wednesday.
On Thursday, in a conference call from Michigan with Washington reporters, he was asked whether Washington was a ''make or break'' state for his campaign.
''Our plan is to win there,'' Dr. Dean said. ''And that's all I'm going to say. Our plan is to win Washington.''
Although no reliable polls have been announced on how Washington may vote, political consultants said they believed that a persistently loyal base here for Dr. Dean gave him a chance of making a showing.
''Because Dean has such a strong base and it is his strategy that this is his turnaround state -- the state he could win -- I would give him odds right now,'' Frank Greer, a Democratic consultant whose firm is working for Senator John Kerry, said. ''It's been astounding when you live in Seattle to see how many folks were for Dean. But I feel that shifting.''
In the last week, a growing number of Dr. Dean's supporters, as well as a number of the most prominent Democratic politicians in the state, including Gov. Gary Locke and six of the state's eight Democratic Congressional delegates, endorsed Mr. Kerry. They said they were closing ranks behind the candidate who they said had the best chance of beating President Bush.
Mr. Kerry's growing strength has also been evident. On Tuesday, he packed more than 2,000 people into a downtown hotel. On Wednesday, Dr. Dean drew 200 to a rally at another downtown hotel.
The chairman of the state party, Paul Berendt, has backed Dr. Dean, pointing up a divide in the party that started becoming noticeable in the last week, as more state elected officials began to join Mr. Kerry's camp.
Mr. Berendt, who said he was expecting a record turnout on Saturday because of unusually high interest in the caucuses, acknowledged how crucial Washington was for Dr. Dean and his supporters.
''Howard has to win some place, and if it's not here, it has to be Maine or Wisconsin or some place pretty soon,'' he said. ''It's very important that he win, and we need that.''
Dr. Dean's campaign officials in Washington played down the endorsements for Mr. Kerry and said they continued to count on a victory here.
''The only real endorsement that matters right now is all those people who show up for Governor Dean on Saturday,'' Steve Haro, a spokesman for Dr. Dean's campaign, said in Washington. ''The roots here are as deep as they are wide.''
The Washington State director of Mr. Kerry's campaign, Ali Wade, said she had seen many former supporters of Dr. Dean decamp to support Mr. Kerry.
''I think what's happened is they've seen the strong victories in Iowa and New Hampshire,'' Ms. Wade said, ''and it makes them look closer at the candidates. A lot of them thought Dean had all the momentum, that Dean could win. But then Dean couldn't win.''
Doug Davies, who lives in Renton, a suburb of Seattle, and is volunteering for Dr. Dean's campaign, posted an upbeat message on Wednesday on the Dean Web log for the state that said:
''This is a wonderful time to be a Washingtonian. This state has never played a significant role in presidential politics before, but this year we will be remembered as the state where Dean people made a stand and the tide was turned! Go get 'em!''
Diane Kenny, who runs a health-care communications company with her husband here, also said she had not been swayed by Mr. Kerry's victories.
''I'm going to the caucus and support Dean all the way,'' Ms. Kenny said. ''I think he feels like I feel. And I'm really mad.''
But Ms. Kenny was preparing herself for a defeat.
''I've still got my McCarthy and my McGovern buttons,'' she said. ''So I'm somebody who's been through this before.''
Her husband, Dennis, who said Dr. Dean enthralled him last summer on his stops here, said that in the last few days he had begun to lean toward Mr. Kerry.
''I'm not born again as a Kerry supporter,'' Mr. Kenny said. ''But he just seems to have momentum and be thoughtful, and it really sounds like the voters in several states have concluded that he's the guy they trust to take the fight to W.''
Governor Locke, who said in an interview he had wavered between Dr. Dean and Mr. Kerry but endorsed Mr. Kerry last week, said winning the Washington caucuses was crucial for Dr. Dean.
''It would be a boost for Governor Dean and enable him to continue moving forward,'' Mr. Locke said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: WASHINGTON
	On a recent afternoon on the top floor of the Boise State University student union, 30 people filed into a glass-walled room with a stark view of the Boise foothills, the city's magical mini-mountain range, steppingstones to the Salmon River Mountains, which eventually loop their way up to Idaho's eastern border and over to the Rockies.
It was a clear winter day -- and a city that is close enough to drizzly Seattle and Portland, Ore., to be considered a piece of the Northwest has every right to gloat about its 234 days of sunshine each year. Puffs of fog clung to the sharp, snowy foothills that rise a mile above the Treasure Valley floor, telegraphing the kind of shocking beauty that can make Idaho look like one big postcard.
The people in the room, who might be considered the political and economic movers and shakers in this city of 193,000 people, were assembled by Boise's new mayor to talk about his transition. They were not there to discuss the foothills per se. It seemed right, though, that the hills were there in full view, representing themselves as another character in the debate over the future of Boise, at a time when the questions have so much to do with the look and feel of this place.
The hills were a political battleground just a short time ago. But then a vocal group of people who wanted to keep developers out of the hills won what they consider a historic fight, persuading fellow residents to do something fairly unthinkable in Idaho: tax themselves, to the tune of $10 million, to buy open space.
''We can't afford to waste any time,'' the mayor, Dave Bieter, 44, told his advisers. ''People's expectations are quite high.''
Sometimes scandal does that to a city. And what happened with the last mayor, Brent Coles, was pretty earth-shattering for Boise, Idaho's capital, where city politics had largely been in the realm of the pure.
Mr. Coles resigned last February and in November pleaded guilty to two charges: presenting a fraudulent account or voucher for reimbursement from the city for tickets to ''Oklahoma!'' in New York City for himself and members of his staff; and misuse of public funds, for seeking reimbursement from the city for a trip he and a staff member took from New York City to Rochester. He was sentenced to 180 days in the county jail and three years' probation on those charges, both felonies.
The way this Republican-leaning city cleaned its political house, electing its first Democratic mayor in 20 years and replacing four longtime members of the six-member City Council, has allowed it to step back and dig into the bigger identity question.
''I think this could be seen as a watershed election,'' said Dr. Jim Weatherby, a professor of political science at Boise State. ''It was as much about maintaining our quality of life as it was about partisan politics.''
As isolated as Boise is, at the nexus of the high desert and the western edge of the Rockies and still close to the middle of nowhere, it became a migration magnet in the 1990's. It drew scores of jobless people from California and other depressed states to what was, until recently, an economic oasis.
Micron Technologies, now one of the world's leading manufacturers of superconductors and Idaho's largest private employer, was founded here in 1978. Hewlett-Packard is here, and Boise's other high-tech companies were spared much of the strangulation from the dot-com bust that left most of the Northwest in the dumps.
Recreation, the weather and the outdoor life are other big lures. Boise is known as the City of Trees, because the French-Canadian fur traders who came through the desert and discovered it in the early 1800's were delighted to find a cottonwood forest flanking what is now the Boise River. (''Les bois!'' they shouted. The woods!)
In the summer, people take tubing breaks at lunch, floating down the river through the city. There is serious hiking to be done here, skiing less than 16 miles from downtown, world-famous white-water rafting, bike trails everywhere and -- although maybe not for long -- a reasonable level of traffic.
At the same time that it seemed everyone was discovering Boise, Idaho's birthrate remained among the highest in the nation and the state's rural and urban populations flip-flopped, with a majority now living in or near cities and a minority living in the hinterlands.
Boise itself grew by almost 70,000 people over the last decade, according to the 2000 census. Sprawl and the vast increase in vehicular traffic have caused huge concerns -- not just about congestion on the roads and the increasingly obvious need for much better public transit, but also about protecting the environment, in the broadest sense -- the very thing that seems to be drawing all these people here.
The Treasure Valley has a growing air quality problem because of smog resulting from cars. And its temperate inversions, once beautiful, now troubling -- this happens when cold air gets trapped under warm air in the valley -- are trapping pollution with them.
Growth is a topic everywhere these days, especially in the West. But the unusual thing about what is happening in Boise is that city officials and other concerned citizens are examining the problems of growth before they are full-blown problems.
''It's a smaller scale at this point,'' Dr. Weatherby of Boise State said, ''but I remember when Phoenix was 400,000 and Mason, Tempe and Scottsdale were all distinct cities. It can happen, and it could happen here.''
Elaine Clegg, the co-executive director of Idaho Smart Growth, a nonprofit organization founded in 1997, and one of the new City Council members, said, ''In Boise, we have an opportunity to make some of these changes, to do some of these things before the worst of the damage is done, rather than after.''
At a noisy pub in the hip and busy downtown, Mayor Bieter seemed concerned about what Boise was facing.
''It's fair to say this is about the identity of Boise,'' he said. ''That's absolutely what the election was about, what the next six or eight years or going to be about: whether we have the guts to grow in a way that keeps the environmental natural resources that we have here and the livability of this city.''
BOISE LETTER  Correction:  February 24, 2004, Tuesday  An article on Feb. 7 on the growth of Boise, Idaho, misstated a place name in a quotation from Dr. Jim Weatherby, a professor of political science at Boise State, who commented on the phenomenon of sprawl. He said, ''I remember when Phoenix was 400,000 and Mesa, Tempe and Scottsdale were all distinct cities.'' He did not say Mason.
	The police here have had their share of high-profile violent or deadly run-ins with protesters, mentally ill suspects and other lawbreakers. But in 2003, for the first time in 15 years, no one here was shot and killed by the police.
Miami, a city with a long history of police shootings and ensuing civil unrest, had no police shootings last year, fatal or otherwise, for the first time in 14 years. In Phoenix, where such shootings reached a level over the last several years that far outpaced the rate of much larger cities, deadly police shootings fell sharply in 2003, to their lowest rate in 14 years.
In these cities and in a fast-growing number of the nation's police departments, officers are carrying a slick new weapon, the Taser gun, which looks a lot like a pistol but does not shoot to kill.
Though officials say the Taser gun, which fires a stunning jolt of electricity, is not solely responsible for a decline in police killings, many departments say it has made a huge difference. Its supporters say the Taser is saving lives, protecting officers and suspects in standoffs that might otherwise have left someone dead or seriously injured.
''This is 100 percent more humane,'' said Officer Tom Burns, who has carried a Taser gun for the past two and a half years on bicycle patrol in Seattle.
But as the Taser spreads rapidly, it is raising questions about whether the weapon, which can also be applied directly to the skin as a stun gun, could be abused by the police. The Taser zaps suspects with 50,000 volts of electricity, disabling them for five seconds at a time. Critics say the weapon is ripe for abuse because the shock leaves no obvious mark, other than what looks like a small bee sting. Human rights groups in the United States and abroad have called Tasers potential instruments of torture.
They are now being used by more than 4,000 police departments. Roughly 170 new departments are buying the high-tech electro-shock guns every month, and the Army has begun using them in Iraq, according to Taser International, the Arizona company that makes them. More than one-third of Seattle's 600 patrol officers carry Tasers. In Miami, Phoenix and a growing number of cities, every officer has one.
Tasers have often been introduced in the wake of public outcry over deadly police shootings. That was the case in Seattle, Denver, Austin, Tex., and Portland, Ore., as part of an effort to reduce killings through the use of training programs and ''less lethal'' weapons.
''You have to think about the alternatives,'' said Officer Burns, who also carries pepper spray and a .40-caliber Glock pistol. He said he had used the Taser five times on suspects who seemed eager to attack or were difficult to control. ''And without this technology you might have to break it down to very brutal methods.''
Officer Burns was on the scene in 2000 when the police here shot and killed a mentally ill man, a widely publicized incident that led to soul-searching in the department and a plan that among other things involved the purchase of Tasers.
The newest Tasers are an advanced version of technology that was developed in the 1970's but was not considered by the police to be effective until recently, The electrical pulses travel from the gun through two 21-foot-long wires that look like a stretched-out Slinky tipped with barbed probes. If the probes pierce skin or a layer of clothing two inches thick or less, the jolt contracts the muscles and throws the suspect off balance. It makes the suspect unable to move, and gives the police a full five seconds with every ''tasing'' to handcuff the suspect. The police say that 50,000 volts is a safe amount of electricity to absorb and that suspects shot with a Taser recover immediately.
But critics and watchdog groups say the Taser could be used to torture suspects and prison inmates to extract confessions or taunt them, and Amnesty International has called for a ban on their use pending studies on their long-term effects. Human rights and civil liberties groups are also questioning whether the electro-shocks that Tasers deliver are potentially deadly.
''Surely it's better than being killed,'' said Dan Handelman, a founder of Portland Copwatch, a group that has been critical of that city's growing use of Tasers over the last year. ''But it's not necessarily an acceptable replacement because it's not being used -- at least in Portland -- in place of lethal force, it's being used for compliance.''
Across the country in recent months, several suspects who were shot with Tasers, sometimes repeatedly, have died. But officials said other health problems, like heart conditions and drug overdoses, were the cause.
The American Civil Liberties Union of Colorado urged the Denver Police Department two weeks ago to limit its use of Tasers. The group cited a rising number of deaths nationally, saying 16 suspects in custody had died after being subdued with Tasers or stun guns in 2003, up from 10 in 2002 and 3 in 2001. But none of the deaths were officially attributed to the effect of the weapons.
In Las Vegas, William Lomax, 26, died last month after being arrested and, according to witnesses and the police, shot with a Taser four or five times, which critics of the Police Department said was an excessive use of force. Investigators said that Mr. Lomax had been under the influence of drugs, but that the cause of death was still under investigation.
Marsha Bell, 22, said she saw Mr. Lomax, her cousin, arrested on Feb. 21 at her apartment complex, where he often visited his family. After he had a run-in with security guards, the police were called.
''He was on the ground,'' Ms. Bell said in a telephone interview. ''He had two pairs of handcuffs on him, and I didn't know the Taser was being used until I heard him screaming. He kept screaming and screaming, saying, 'Oh God, Jesus, please no.' He was screaming in pain, he was hurt and he didn't resist.''
Lt. Tom Monahan of the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department, which bought several hundred Tasers last year, said that Mr. Lomax had struggled with officers, security guards and paramedics, and that the Taser was used while officers were trying to handcuff him.
Officer Thomas Miller, who conducts Taser training for the Las Vegas department, said that there were clear guidelines on when Tasers should be used.
''In the past, an officer would have to fight,'' Officer Miller said. ''Now we have an option to stop that before it gets to that point, greatly reducing the risk to the officer and the suspect.''
The police do say that a Taser would never replace lethal weapons if an officer felt his life was in imminent danger, like when a suspect is wielding a knife or a gun at close proximity, or when no other officer is available to provide ''lethal cover'' for an officer using the Taser. Most departments allow officers on the scene to make that judgment call.
In the New York City Police Department, supervisors and members of the large Emergency Service Unit, which helps patrol officers in violent situations, carry Tasers, but patrol officers do not, the police said.
The newest models cost $799 each, according to Taser International, the leading producer of the weapons. But company officials, who have seen their stock skyrocket over the last year, say the savings to police departments that might otherwise be sued over violent confrontations or shootings is potentially huge.
The police and other supporters of the new technology also say there are built-in safeguards to prevent abuse of the guns. Each Taser, which is powered by batteries, has a data port that records each shock and is used by police departments when they prepare incident reports, allowing supervisors to count how many times a Taser was fired.
Steve Tuttle, a spokesman for Taser International, which is based in Scottsdale, Ariz., said the company continually reviewed data and had found few instances among about 70,000 uses so far of abuse or inappropriate use.
''If there's a bad apple out there, the technology we made will catch that bad apple,'' Mr. Tuttle said. ''We've won the lottery in terms of great success, stock market-wise, but with that comes much more scrutiny.''
Officer Burns of the Seattle department said the police could not deny that a misguided officer could abuse any weapon. But he said that there had been numerous instances in Seattle where officers had used the Taser instead of fists, nightsticks, guns or pepper spray, which can have much longer effects than Taser shocks, and that suspects had recovered immediately.
''Shooting someone is not a badge of honor,'' Officer Burns said. ''It's something no one wants to do. No police officer in the world is paid to die, no police officer in the world is paid to get hurt.''
	