East of the waterfront, up on South Jackson Street, past the International District and at the base of a steep hill in the Central area, looms a giant red Wonder Bread sign.
A lonely piece of Americana, the neon sign is perched atop a shuttered bakery in a neighborhood of boarded-up stores and more than a few depressed, empty streets. Beyond the broader neighborhood implications of the factory's imminent demolition and replacement with housing and shops is the prickly question of what happens to the sign.
The San Diego company that is developing the 1.6-acre property said the sign would be donated to the nearby Pratt Institute of Fine Arts. But that has some neighborhood residents worried that Pratt will auction it off to wealthy collectors. They strongly suspect that ''Wonder Bread,'' or ''Wonder'' or ''Bread'' -- or just ''W'' or ''B,'' for that matter -- would be a hot commodity for the growing set of neon industrial art aficionados.
Old neon industrial signs are in the midst of a renaissance, especially across the Northwest and in Los Angeles. Seattle is on the cutting edge of this scene, mostly because the city, already a national leader in historic preservation, did not take down or restored many of the original signs at bustling establishments like the Pike Place Market, founded in 1907, and the Elephant Car Wash, started up in 1951.
Still, some, like the Wonder Bread sign and the neon R for the Rainier Brewing Company, which is now in a neon museum, are no longer hovering above thriving businesses.
Pratt officials did not return telephone calls seeking comment about their plans for the sign. But the executive director, Earl Sedlik, told The Seattle Post-Intelligencer last year, when the sign question first emerged, ''Our artists are eager to inherit the sign -- whether or not it ends up here, I don't know.''
Mr. Sedlik added that the art center was conducting a fund-raising campaign, ''and as a charitable endeavor, there are ways for us to offer those letters for our needs.''
Bill Bradburd, an artist who moved here from San Francisco, said the Wonder Bread sign was really a symbol of a ''bait and switch'' on the part of city officials. Mr. Bradburd, who lives near the bakery and is a co-chairman of the Jackson Place Community Council, said development was moving at such a fast pace that city officials who had promised to protect the character of Seattle's neighborhoods were instead seizing on the dollars flowing in.
Mr. Bradburd and others on the council want the sign displayed publicly near the site of the bakery. He is at odds with some, though, by proposing the sign be split up, putting ''Read'' over a local library and perhaps ''Wonder'' over a new elementary school.
But is the tension over these 11 red letters, each six feet tall, really about the sign?
''These battles over saving something old are proxy battles,'' said David Brewster, the founder of Town Hall, Seattle's cultural center, who is writing a history of the city since the 1962 World's Fair here. ''They are really battles against traffic, although of course gentrification weighs in.''
Seattle, founded in the 1850's, is still relatively young, Mr. Brewster said.''Where you don't have a lot of history,'' he said, ''you do want to hang onto the little you do have. And where you have a high degree of change, you fear change.''
The city, still recovering from the dot-com bust, is in a young yet remarkable real estate boom. Projections for 2006 construction, said Alan Justad, a spokesman for the city's planning department, outpace 2005, when the city accepted a record $2 billion in residential and commercial building permit applications, with $1.7 billion approved. Much of the development is concentrated downtown under a planning strategy known as ''urban density,'' which is intended to prevent sprawl.
But development is also coming soon to neighborhoods like the Central area. Seattle, with a population of 572,000, according to 2006 city figures, and an additional three million people living elsewhere in the metropolitan area, is projecting a population increase within the city limits of at least 100,000 people by 2024.
About half of those would live downtown, Mr. Justad said, with the rest in new housing planned for some of Seattle's 38 neighborhoods, or ''urban villages,'' in planning parlance.
Seattle's neighborhoods are typically quiet, self-contained residential areas with few apartment buildings and far fewer parking headaches than most other major cities.
The downside to the city's decidedly un-urban neighborhoods, for some, is the lack of hustle and bustle, or in the case of the Central area, a largely poor, black neighborhood, outright dilapidation on some of the blocks soon to be redeveloped.
''The bottom line is green; you can't hold back progress,'' said Terry Johnson, 62, who grew up in the neighborhood with Jimi Hendrix and for a time worked at the bakery. ''Development, it's inevitable, and the worse thing you can do is not develop there and just leave them all to grow old poor.''
Even so, the history in the Central area remains so vibrant, the nostalgia so loud, that people who grew up here in the 1950's and 60's say they can still hear the blues and jazz piping out from what was the only black radio show, broadcast for one hour each Sunday night from the back of a local record store.
They remember hearing Hendrix, whose house was three blocks from the factory before being moved to a suburb last year, jamming with his friends on guitars. And they remember the children scrambling after school to the bakery to buy day-old bread for their dinner tables.
''Seeing the cookies and bread on the assembly belts, it was a show,'' said Adrienne Bailey, who grew up near the factory and is now secretary to the Central Area Neighborhood District Council. ''It was a smell blocks before you got there. Oh, I have beautiful childhood memories of Twinkies and pies, and a beautiful big red neon sign, all lit up.''
	The Army has charged a member of the Washington State National Guard with attempting to supply intelligence of Army organizations and weapons systems to the Qaeda terrorist network, Army officials said on Wednesday. The intelligence included details about military personnel, troop movement, tactics and ''vulnerabilities,'' the charges said.
Specialist Ryan G. Anderson, 26, a Muslim convert who Army officials said also went by the name Amir Abdul Rashid, was charged on Feb. 12 at the Fort Lewis base south of here with four counts of attempting to supply information to the enemy, but the charges were not made public until Wednesday.
Specialist Anderson was taken into custody at Fort Lewis last week after an investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Justice Department and the Army found that he had used a computer to try to contact Qaeda cells in the United States, Army officials said.
According to the charges made public on Wednesday at Fort Lewis, Specialist Anderson provided extensive information to military personnel posing as members of Al Qaeda, both in person and via the Internet.
''I wish to meet with you,'' the charges quoted Specialist Anderson as saying on the Internet, to people he thought were members of Al Qaeda. ''I share your cause.''
Specialist Anderson, whose tank brigade is scheduled next month to deploy to Iraq for one year, was raised by a Christian family in Everett, north of here.
Specialist Anderson's case is the latest example of an American military soldier being formally charged with espionage, but military experts said the charges were the result of the kind of sting operation not seen since the cold war. The charges, officials said, stemmed from conduct that occurred from Jan. 22 to Feb. 11. They could carry the death penalty if Specialist Anderson is convicted, according to military Code of Justice.
Members of Specialist Anderson's family declined to comment on Wednesday. A man who answered the telephone at the house of his father and stepmother in Everett said family members would not speak ''for at least four weeks,'' and messages left at the home where Specialist Anderson lived with his wife, Erin, in Lynnwood, a Seattle suburb, were not answered.
Army officials said Specialist Anderson had been assigned a defense lawyer, but they declined to provide the lawyer's name Wednesday night in response to a faxed request.
Specialist Anderson converted to Islam five years ago, people who know him said. He graduated from Cascade High School in 1995 and received a bachelor's degree in history from Washington State University in Pullman in 2002.
While at the university, he attended a local mosque and occasionally participated in a student Muslim group, said Irshad Altheimer, a member of the Muslim Students Association.
Mr. Altheimer described Specialist Anderson as nice and curious about Islam.
Jennifer Seratte, a classmate of Specialist Anderson's at Cascade High School, said he was on the debate team and described him as ''very serious,'' and a very active practicing Christian.
''This whole thing just totally blew my mind,'' she said.
Ms. Seratte added: ''He was on the debate team, he was always debating about government and politics and the laws. He knew the ways the government worked, and he was patriotic. If you were going to go up against him in a debate, you had better know what you were talking about.''
Muslims in the Seattle area said that Specialist Anderson joined a local Muslim e-mail group two years ago, using the Internet names Abdul Rashid and Gunfighter and bragging about being an expert marksman.
The charges against Specialist Anderson said that he had tried to ''aid the enemy'' with sketches of the M1A1 and M1A2 tanks, offering the investigators a computer disk containing his passport photograph and military identification card.
The charges also said he tried to provide detailed information to investigators posing as Qaeda operatives about weaknesses in the military and ''means of killing U.S. Army personnel and destroying U.S. Army weapon systems and equipment.''
Legal experts said the charges were among the most serious they had heard of since the cold war.
''There have been a number of sting operations over the years, but I don't think any have been similar to this,'' Philip Cave, a former military lawyer, said. ''Looking at the charge sheet, it certainly reads as extremely serious.''
	