State inspectors often overlook serious deficiencies, including life-threatening conditions, in the nation's nursing homes, Congressional investigators say in a new report.
In the report, the investigators, from the Government Accountability Office, questioned data used by the Bush administration in arguing that its policies have fostered ''significant improvements'' in the nation's nursing homes.
Nursing homes must meet federal standards to participate in Medicaid and Medicare. Homes are inspected by state employees working under contract to the federal government.
Much of the apparent improvement has resulted from the fact that those state inspectors ''missed serious deficiencies'' or understated their severity, the accountability office said.
The Congressional investigators found pervasive understatement of ''serious deficiencies that cause actual harm or immediate jeopardy to patients.'' The harm includes severe weight loss, ''multiple falls resulting in broken bones and other injuries, and serious, avoidable pressure sores,'' the report said. The deficiencies included fire safety violations.
The top Medicare official, Dr. Mark B. McClellan, said that he too was ''concerned about possible understatement or omission of serious deficiencies'' by state inspectors.
Over all, Dr. McClellan said, the quality of nursing home care has improved in the last five years. But, he said, these gains are in jeopardy because Congress has not provided enough money and state budgets for this purpose are ''very limited.''
Dr. McClellan said the Bush administration wanted to link payment of nursing homes to the quality of care they provide. He said he expected to test such a ''pay for performance'' system this year.
Medicaid, the federal-state program for low-income people, covers two-thirds of the nation's 1.6 million nursing home residents. Together, Medicaid and Medicare spend more than $67 billion a year on nursing home care.
The study was requested by Senators Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, and Herb Kohl, Democrat of Wisconsin. ''If state surveyors are missing serious deficiencies in the quality of care, then the federal government has not yet achieved the necessary level of improvement in oversight of the inspection process,'' said Mr. Grassley, who is chairman of the Finance Committee.
In its report, the Government Accountability Office made these points:
States often take weeks or months to start investigating reports of harm to nursing home residents. These reports come from patients and their relatives and from nursing home employees.
Some useful information on nursing home quality is available at a federal Web site, but much of the data is inaccurate or unreliable.
The timing of inspections is highly predictable. This ''allows homes to conceal problems if they so desire.''
Concerns about cost have delayed the installation of automatic sprinkler systems in older nursing homes. More than 20 percent of homes lack such fire protection devices. The industry wants the government to help pay the installation costs, estimated at $1 billion.
Dr. McClellan said the proportion of nursing homes cited for serious deficiencies had declined sharply, to 16 percent last year from 29 percent in 1999.
The Government Accountability Office found great variation from state to state, and it suggested that inspectors were more rigorous in some states.
From 2003 to 2005, the report said, California cited 6 percent of its nursing homes for serious violations, while Connecticut cited 54 percent of its homes.
Senator Kohl said, ''There are too many inconsistencies in what is deemed a deficiency from state to state.''
The accountability office said that some inspectors were confused about the meaning of ''actual harm.'' As a result, it said, the same conditions are sometimes viewed as a violation of federal rules in one state but not in others.
Texas reported a big decline in serious deficiencies over the last five years. But one reason, the report said, is that Texas had ''a significant number of inexperienced surveyors'' who were hesitant to cite nursing homes for major violations.
The Bush administration said that, by some measures, the regulation of nursing homes had improved. For example, it said, inspectors investigated 47,124 complaints in 2004, reflecting an increase of 45 percent over the number investigated in 1999.
Moreover, Dr. McClellan said, inspectors have paid more attention to fire safety since 31 people died in nursing home fires in Connecticut and Tennessee in 2003. Inspectors identified 47,456 fire-safety violations in 2004, an increase of 20 percent over the previous year.
Federal employees visit about 5 percent of the nation's 17,000 nursing homes each year to validate the findings of state inspectors. In 28 percent of these visits from 2002 to 2004, the federal agents found serious problems not detected by state inspectors. This proportion has increased in recent years, from 22 percent in 2000 to 2001.
	Defying a veto threat, the House on Friday passed a bill to require the government to negotiate with drug manufacturers to obtain lower drug prices for Medicare beneficiaries.
The vote, 255 to 170, was cast with lightning speed eight days after the new Congress convened. No Democrat voted against it, while 24 Republicans joined the 231 Democrats voting in favor.
Representative Christopher S. Murphy, a freshman Democrat from Connecticut, said, ''This bill has symbolic importance, breaking the grasp of the drug industry on this town.''
It is, Mr. Murphy added, ''the beginning of a process to repair the Medicare drug benefit.''
The measure is unlikely to become law in its current form. But some version, focusing on certain types of very expensive drugs, has bipartisan support in the Senate and could eventually be included in a measure to revamp the drug benefit, which a Republican-led Congress created in 2003.
The bill, which fulfills a Democratic campaign promise, says the secretary of health and human services ''shall negotiate with pharmaceutical manufacturers the prices that may be charged'' to Medicare drug plans.
The 2003 law prohibits such negotiations. The drug benefit is delivered by private insurers, subsidized by the government. These companies have negotiated substantial discounts with drug manufacturers. Under the House bill, insurers could seek discounts deeper than those negotiated by the government.
Representative Joe L. Barton, Republican of Texas, predicted that the bill would die ''a nice benign death.''
The White House press secretary, Tony Snow, said, ''If this bill is presented to the president, he will veto it.''
Democrats, who like to portray Republicans as a tool of special interests, said a veto would hand them an issue that could be used to good effect in the 2008 elections.
Some experts, including the Congressional Budget Office and Medicare actuaries, say they doubt that the bill would save money for older people or the government.
If the government, for example, tried to negotiate a discount for a particular drug and the manufacturer refused to lower its price, it is not clear what, if any, recourse Medicare would have. Without the ability to steer patients to particular drugs, the budget office said, Medicare would not have the leverage to obtain significant discounts.
Representative Tom Price, Republican of Georgia, described the bill as ''a solution in search of a problem.'' The cost of the drug benefit is lower than expected, Mr. Price said, and the number of drug plans available to beneficiaries -- more than 40 in every state -- is higher than expected.
In the House debate, each party used somewhat contradictory arguments. Republicans said the bill would not save any money because the government could not restrict access to drugs. But then they said the legislation would limit the drugs available to doctors and patients.
''A government bureaucrat will be empowered to determine what kinds of drugs our seniors have access to,'' the Republican whip, Representative Roy Blunt of Missouri, said. ''If the government could not reach a deal with a drug company, seniors would not have access to those drugs.''
For their part, Democrats said Medicare was overpaying for drugs and could obtain much lower prices if it negotiated with drug manufacturers, as the Department of Veterans Affairs does. But Democrats said they did not want to give Medicare two of the most powerful tools used by the veterans agency: the ability to establish a ''federal ceiling price'' and a uniform list of covered drugs, known as a national formulary.
While sketchy about details of their proposal, Democrats were clear that their purpose was to help beneficiaries and to reduce drug companies' profits in the Medicare market.
Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan and chief sponsor of the bill, said, ''Those who insist that the sky will fall if drug companies negotiate lower prescription prices are arguing that those companies should continue to skin a fat hog at the expense of taxpayers and beneficiaries.''
Another Democrat, Representative Lois Capps of California, said: ''We can vote in favor of large drug companies that have raked in record profits under the Medicare drug plan. Or we can vote in favor of our senior constituents. Common sense tells me that the big drug and insurance companies would not be so adamantly opposed to this bill if they did not fear that it could result in actual price reductions.''
Republicans said Medicare drug plans already had the power to negotiate drug prices and were using it. But Representative Bill Pascrell Jr., Democrat of New Jersey, said, ''This power is splintered now among numerous private plans.''
The Medicare bill was one of the high-priority measures that Speaker Nancy Pelosi promised to pass in the first 100 hours of the new Congress.
	After strenuous protests from governors of both parties, the Bush administration said Sunday that it would reconsider tough new rules on the financing of Medicaid that could limit the states' ability to provide health care for millions of poor people.
Tommy G. Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, conveyed the administration's decision to governors here for the winter meeting of the National Governors Association.
Though formal sessions of the association focused on issues that cut across party lines, like Medicaid, education and highway construction, presidential politics dominated many conversations among governors.
Democratic governors expressed alarm at the loss of jobs, especially those in manufacturing, and the growth of the federal budget deficit in the past three years, while Republicans insisted that the economy was bouncing back.
''President Bush does not appear to have an understanding of the pain caused by unemployment,'' said Gov. Tom Vilsack of Iowa, chairman of the Democratic Governors Association. Gov. Jennifer M. Granholm of Michigan, a Democrat, said Mr. Bush's tax cuts were not producing new jobs in her state.
Gov. Bob Taft of Ohio, chairman of the Republican Governors Association, said: ''Consumer confidence is up. The stock market is up. All economic indicators are moving in the right direction.'' Another Republican, Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, tried to dispel the perception that his party saw the shift of service jobs from the United States to other countries as part of some global economic strategy. ''We are concerned any time any job leaves our shores and goes somewhere else,'' Mr. Romney said.
State officials say soaring Medicaid costs have put them in a fiscal vise, as revenue collections have been stagnant in recent years.
Federal officials did not withdraw the proposed Medicaid rules but promised to consult governors and to solicit public comment for 60 days before enacting the restrictions.
The restrictions would give federal officials sweeping new power to review state decisions on Medicaid spending and the sources of revenue used by states to pay their share of Medicaid costs.
Medicaid provides health benefits to 50 million people a year and is financed jointly by the federal government and the states. But federal officials say states have used creative bookkeeping and other ploys to obtain large amounts of federal Medicaid money without paying their share.
The proposed changes have touched off an uproar among state officials. Gov. Dirk Kempthorne of Idaho, a Republican who is chairman of the National Governors Association, said the federal government was imposing ''new administrative requirements and new costs on the states.''
Gov. Ruth Ann Minner of Delaware, a Democrat, said, ''We don't want all that extra paperwork.''
Gov. Phil Bredesen of Tennessee, a Democrat, said the federal government was now reneging on financial arrangements that it approved just a few years ago.
''The federal government ought to honor its commitments and certainly should not characterize these arrangements as cheating on the part of the states,'' Mr. Bredesen said in an interview.
In a letter to the governors, Mr. Thompson, a former governor of Wisconsin, said he would work with them to avoid a confrontation over the president's Medicaid proposal.
''I intend to enter into consultations on the proposal with the states through the National Governors Association and the National Association of State Medicaid Directors,'' Mr. Thompson said. ''Once those consultations are complete, I intend to republish the notice in the Federal Register and provide for a 60-day formal comment period.''
Many governors also raised questions about details of the new Medicare law, signed by President Bush in early December. Under the law, the federal government will assume some of the prescription drug costs now paid by states for low-income people entitled to both Medicaid and Medicare.
That change will eventually save money for the states. But in the next few years, states expect to incur additional costs, as they determine who is eligible for federal subsidies intended to help low-income people pay for their medicines.
Mr. Bush's latest budget request would reduce federal Medicaid payments to states for new computer systems to evaluate eligibility and to detect Medicaid fraud. On Sunday, a committee of the governors association approved a resolution opposing such cuts.
Congress last year provided $20 billion in emergency financial relief to the states, which said they were experiencing the worst fiscal problems since World War II. Half the money was earmarked for Medicaid. The Medicaid money runs out June 30.
Mr. Kempthorne said the governors association was ''not advocating extension'' of the temporary federal aid. But he said he hoped the Bush administration would give the states more discretion to decide who received what benefits under Medicaid.
Correction:  February 24, 2004, Tuesday  A picture caption yesterday with an article about the winter meeting of the National Governors Association misidentified one governor. He was Joseph E. Kernan of Indiana, not Ernie Fletcher of Kentucky.
	