I went to Iowa hunting Howard Dean. His campaign said he might give me five minutes. On the phone.
At first, five minutes sounded pretty cursory. But I decided to be philosophical. Out of his 15 minutes of angry fame, Howard Dean was willing to devote a third of it to me.
How best to figure out someone who comes out of nowhere and wants to lead the world in five minutes?
I quizzed Tom Harkin, Mr. Iowa, about why he had endorsed Dr. Dean, even though it infuriated his spurned Senate buddy John Kerry and disappointed fellow Midwesterner Dick Gephardt. Senator Harkin didn't seem especially close to the Vermont governor. At the 2002 Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner here, he twice called the Democrat John Dean (as Martin Sheen did in a speech here last week).
''He's a fire hydrant,'' Mr. Harkin said over dinner at Bambino's in Cumming. ''If you kick it, it's going to hurt you. But it's stable and secure and there when you need it.''
It wasn't the most glamorous metaphor. But I knew what he meant.
Democrats yearn for somebody tough enough to stand up to the Bush family machine. They're still smarting that Al Gore lost a presidency he won. They watched even a fellow as gritty as John McCain crumple during the 2000 South Carolina primary, stunned by the sulfurous personal attacks of Bush supporters.
A fire hydrant sprays back.
Dr. Dean has certainly proved he's tough. The press critiques on him -- ''hotheaded,'' ''arrogant,'' ''mercurial,'' ''a jerk'' -- echo the knocks on W., back before ''the Roman candle'' of the Bush family ran for Texas governor and transformed himself into a disciplined and genial campaigner.
After months of watching Dr. Dean's neck bulging, face churning, and sleeves rolled up tourniquet-tight, many of my colleagues were longing to ask the pugilistic pol, as one put it: ''Do you ever lighten up, dude?''
I decided to use my five minutes to find out if he has the sunny side Americans love in their leaders. I'd ask him what he'd want to do for fun on a Saturday night if he could play hooky. I'd ask him the last time he did something goofy and what made him really laugh.
While I was waiting for him to call, I grew more and more afraid that he'd get angry at me for wasting his time with piffle. I cowered by the phone, jumping when it rang.
I never got the five minutes with him. Which left me five minutes to think about why his candidacy was sputtering.
He has a problem with his mythic arc. Presidential campaigns trace the patterns of mythological adventure, as contenders strive to show they are superior in the knightly virtues of temperance, loyalty and courage.
Once candidates showed that they had completed the ''hero-task'' by highlighting their war exploits -- J.F.K. and PT 109, George Bush senior getting shot down as a young Navy pilot over Chichi Jima.
Candidates in the Vietnam War generation who chose not to go to Vietnam had to find more personal dragons and giants to slay. Bill Clinton told the story of confronting an abusive and alcoholic stepfather; George W. Bush recounted overcoming alcoholism and career drift by embracing Christ.
In Iowa, Mr. Gephardt talks about the transforming experience of his son's battle against cancer. Mr. Kerry describes the crucible of Vietnam. John Edwards's arc is going from the son of a millworker to a Grishamesque trial lawyer standing up against corporate malefactors.
Shunning personal storytelling, Dr. Dean has chosen to make his campaign arc about his campaign arc. He brags of facing down the dragon George W. Bush.
As he said at a rally here last week about his Democratic rivals: ''They weren't there when it was time to stand up to the president on the war in Iraq. . . . If you want someone to stand up to George Bush, I've done it.''
Personal history shouldn't be a substitute for policy. An overreliance on stories of dramatic heroism and physical suffering can overwhelm a campaign, as it did with Bob Kerrey and Bob Dole, devolving into the politics of self. And yuppie sagas of sin and redemption can become strained with repetition.
But a race rooted mainly in attacking the president may not take Dr. Dean far enough. Voters want someone who's been through the fire. They care about character. They want to know the evolution of the man, even if it's a myth.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com
	In the Ford White House, Dick Cheney's Secret Service name was Backseat, because he was the model of an unobtrusive staffer, the perfect unflashy deputy chief of staff for that lord of the bureaucratic dance, Donald Rumsfeld.
As James Mann writes in his new book, ''The Rise of the Vulcans: The History of Bush's War Cabinet,'' Mr. Cheney started out supervising such lowly matters as fixing a stopped-up drain in a White House bathroom sink; getting a headrest for Betty Ford's helicopter seat; and sorting out which salt shakers -- the regular ones or, as he put it, the ''little dishes of salt with funny little spoons'' -- would be best for stag dinners in the president's private quarters.
Rummy's alter ego rose quickly, though, because he seemed to have no ego. Good old Dick could be counted on to be the man behind the man, a butler to power. The new President Bush, a tabula rasa in foreign affairs, put himself in Mr. Cheney's hands.
But W. had barely settled into the Oval when Backseat clambered into the front seat. Retracing the rush to war, the names Cheney and Chalabi are entwined in bold relief.
Back when Dick Cheney was fiddling with salt shakers, Ahmad Chalabi, a smooth-talking and wealthy young Iraqi M.I.T. graduate, was founding the Petra Bank in Jordan.
As Mr. Cheney moved up in the capital, Mr. Chalabi was tripped up in Jordan by a small matter of embezzlement from his own bank. Jordanian officials have said that the crime rocked their economy and that they paid $300 million to depositors to cover the bank's losses. By the time Mr. Chalabi was convicted and received a sentence of 22 years of hard labor, he was a fugitive in London.
During the early 90's, when Mr. Cheney was a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, Mr. Chalabi was in a full courtship press with Washington's conservative and journalistic elites. He saw them as a springboard for his triumphant return to Iraq.
After 9/11, his passionate desire to take out Saddam coincided with that of conservatives. All they needed for their belli was a casus, so Mr. Chalabi obligingly conned the neocons.
He hoodwinked his pals Dick Cheney, Paul Wolfowitz and Richard Perle into believing Iraq would be a flowery cakewalk to democracy.
A wily expert in the politics of the bazaar, he knew he had to sell his scheme on what was good for Americans and their security. He was happy to funnel information to the vice president that painted a picture of Saddam hunkered on a hair-raising stockpile of W.M.D. His group, the Iraqi National Congress, tried to spin our government and media through its ''information collection program.'' Intelligence officials now say that the prewar information provided to Washington by this group was suspect and useless, even disinformation.
But here's the wild thing: the propaganda program was underwritten by U.S. government funds. So Americans paid Ahmad Chalabi to gull them into a war that is costing them a billion a week -- and a precious human cost. Cops dealing with their snitches check out the information better than the Bush administration did.
Mr. Chalabi's séances swayed the political set, the intelligence set and the journalistic set. In an effect Senator Bob Graham dubs ''incestuous amplification,'' the bogus stories spewed by Iraqi exiles and defectors ricocheted through an echo chamber of government and media, making it sound as if multiple, reliable sources were corroborating the same story. Rather, one self-interested source was replicating like computer spam.
The C.I.A. was stung to find out its analysts had mistakenly thought that Iraq weapons information had been confirmed by multiple sources, when it came from only a single source; that analysts had relied on a fabricating Iraqi defector and spin material from Iraqi exiles; and that this blather made its way into documents and speeches used by the Bush administration to justify war. George Tenet ordered a major change in procedure last week, removing barricades so that analysts can know more about the identities of clandestine agents' sources, and their possible motives.
But even incestuous amplification could not have drowned out reality if Bush officials had not glommed onto the Chalabi flummery for their own reasons -- to feed their fantasies about refashioning America's power, psyche and military, and making over the Middle East in our image.
Swept up in big dreams, the foreign policy dream team became dupes in Ahmad Chalabi's big con.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com
	Young Americans are bravely fighting and dying in Iraq, trying to fulfill the audacious vision of George W. Bush and Dick Cheney to remold Iraq in the image of America.
But while we try to turn them into us, who have we become?
The president presents himself as an avatar of American values, plain-spoken cowboy and tough flyboy.
But Condi Rice's testimony on Thursday raises the depressing possibility that we've lost the essence of our frontier spirit: the ingenious individualist who gets around the system and faces down the drones.
From Abigail Adams to Tom Sawyer to Bugs Bunny to Jimmy Stewart's Jefferson Smith to Indiana Jones, the best American character is plucky, nimble, clever, inventive.
So it's disturbing to see our government reacting to crises with a jaded shrug and lumbering gait, especially since we are up against such a creative, chameleonlike enemy.
Consider the pathetic performance of NASA, which inverted its motto to ''Failure is an option'' by shrugging off warnings about the safety of the seven Columbia astronauts who burned up coming back to earth, and not trying to send up a rescue shuttle.
This no-can-do spirit marked George Tenet's lame excuses to senators in February who wanted to know why the C.I.A. never picked up the trail of Marwan al-Shehhi, the pilot who crashed Flight 175 into the south tower on 9/11, even though the Germans gave the agency his name and phone number. ''They didn't give us a first and a last name until after 9/11,'' Mr. Tenet said.
And what would Eliot Ness say about an F.B.I. that is less computer savvy than American preschoolers and Islamic terrorists? The F.B.I. is only halfway through modernizing its computers, which could not, before 9/11, do two searches at once, such as ''Al Qaeda'' and ''flight schools.'' Can't we draft Bill Gates for duty?
This ominous passivity was threaded through the testimony of Ms. Rice, a brainy and accomplished woman who should represent the best of America. She blamed ''systemic'' and ''structural'' impediments that prevented the C.I.A. and the F.B.I. from sharing. She complained that other people hadn't recommended what she should do; even the terrorists were faulted for not giving specifics.
The screeching chatter in the spring and summer of 2001 -- ''There will be attacks in the near future'' -- did not yank Mr. Bush and his team from their Iraq fixation. ''But they don't tell us when,'' Ms. Rice protested. ''They don't tell us where, they don't tell us who, and they don't tell us how.'' Paging Nancy Drew.
Inconclusive intelligence did not bother the Bush team when it wanted to be ''actionable'' on Iraq, or engage in ''tit for tat'' with Saddam.
The Aug. 6, 2001, presidential daily briefing -- remarkably headlined ''Bin Laden Determined to Attack Inside the United States'' -- mentioned Al Qaeda's wanting to hijack planes and the 70 F.B.I. field investigations into suspected Al Qaeda sleeper cells in the U.S.
The briefing had three-month-old information that Al Qaeda was trying to sneak into the country for an explosives attack. No wonder the C.I.A. chief and counterterrorism czar were running around with their hair on fire.
What should have made Condi hysterical, she deemed ''historical.''
W. kept fishing and denouncing Saddam, while Condi sat for a glam Vogue photo shoot and interview.
On Iraq, they ran roughshod over the system. On Al Qaeda, Condi blamed the system, saying she couldn't act on Richard Clarke's plan until there was a strategy, a policy, ''tasking,'' meetings, etc.
The F.B.I. officials who ignored Coleen Rowley as she tried to break through the obtuse leadership of Louis Freeh's F.B.I. to get evidence on Zacarias Moussaoui, and Kenneth Williams, the Phoenix agent who outlined the Al Qaeda plot to train Arab terrorists in our flight schools, have not been held accountable. Why aren't the heroic Ms. Rowley and Mr. Williams running something?
Dick Clarke has struck a chord because his passionate efforts reflected those great American virtues of ingenuity and brashness. Even if he was a bit of a cowboy, loading up his .357 sidearm to return to the West Wing the night after 9/11, at least he was not dozing through High Noon.
My last column should have identified Iraqis fighting inside a Falluja mosque as Sunnis, and the Iraq turnover date as June.
E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com
	