CenterPoint Properties Trust, a leading developer of industrial property, has burnished its image over the last few years by transforming a former weapons factory in the Chicago suburb of Elwood into a successful intermodal railroad and warehouse complex.
CenterPoint had been a publicly traded real estate investment trust since 1993, but its solid reputation was not reflected in its share price. Analysts fretted when the company tried to spread its wings beyond its home base of Chicago. The sudden dismissal last year of a top executive also dragged down the stock.
Fortunately for CenterPoint, executives at the California Public Employees' Retirement System, or CalPers, the nation's largest pension fund, saw things differently. CalPers, a joint venture partner with CenterPoint for the last five years, liked the company's plan to build additional intermodal centers -- where shipping containers from around the world are transferred from long freight trains to shorter trains or trucks. CalPers also had great confidence in CenterPoint's management, said José McNeil, who manages the pension fund's industrial portfolio.
So last fall, CalEast Industrial Investors, a joint venture between CalPers and LaSalle Investment Management, a division of Chicago-based Jones Lang LaSalle that invests in real estate for pension funds and other institutional investors, made the kind of move that is occurring with increasing frequency. It bought CenterPoint for $3.4 billion, or $50 a share. The sale, representing a 13.1 percent premium above the average stock price over the three months before the deal was announced on Dec. 9, was completed last week.
Since 2004, 12 real estate investment trusts, or REIT's, representing all commercial property sectors -- office, industrial, retail, hotels and apartments -- have been acquired by private companies, and two other buyout offers are pending, both involving the Blackstone Group, a private equity firm in New York. Last week, Blackstone agreed to buy the CarrAmerica Realty Corporation, a large national office REIT based in Washington, for $5.6 billion, the richest price so far. Shareholders are expected to approve the deal this summer.
Real estate specialists say more REIT's can be expected to go private as long as interest rates remain low, investors are flush with capital and private buyers and Wall Street analysts have disparate views of how much the underlying real estate is worth. ''I think it will continue as long as the stocks are cheap,'' said James S. Corl, the chief investment officer for real estate at Cohen & Steers, CarrAmerica's largest shareholder.
As many as 10 other deals may be in the pipeline, said Richard D. Kincaid, the chief executive of Equity Office Properties Trust, a REIT based in Chicago that is almost certain to remain public because of its enormous size; it has interests in 615 office buildings, with 111.1 million square feet.
Jonathan L. Mechanic, the chairman of the real estate practice at Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson, said his firm was working on at least four possible deals.
The announcement by Town and Country Trust, an apartment REIT based in Baltimore, that it had accepted a buyout offer from an investor group made up of Morgan Stanley Real Estate and the Onex Corporation of Canada, unleashed a bidding war with two other suitors. Shareholders approved the deal with Morgan Stanley last week, but not before the bid was raised from $33.90 a share to $40.20 a share.
All this activity has helped to drive up share prices, even for REIT's that are not considered acquisition targets. ''The stocks are up another percent today,'' Chandler Spears, the portfolio manager for Davis Real Estate Fund of Santa Fe, a major shareholder in CenterPoint and other REIT stocks, said last week. ''It's almost getting a bit comical. It's like tech mania has hit REIT-land.''
Since Dec. 31, REIT shares have risen 11.6 percent, according to Keven Lindemann, the director of real estate for SNL Financial, a research company based in Charlottesville, Va. Helping to spur the privatization trend is the widespread availability of debt financing, giving private buyers an advantage over public companies, which have traditionally limited their borrowing. ''There isn't a lot of precedent for highly leveraged REIT's,'' said Cameron W. Clough, a managing director of North American banking for Morgan Stanley Real Estate, which advised CalEast on the CenterPoint deal. ''The market would have a little trouble accepting it.''
Blackstone, for example, is under no such constraints. The firm will borrow $4.25 billion to complete its purchase of CarrAmerica, the REIT said last week in a document filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Blackstone declined to discuss its plans for CarrAmerica, which has buildings in two of the strongest office markets, Washington and Southern California, but is also well represented in Northern California, a market that has yet to recover from the technology bust.
Mr. Kincaid, the Equity Office chief executive, however, speculated that Blackstone would sell CarrAmerica's trophy assets while holding onto its buildings in the Silicon Valley and San Francisco in anticipation of improvement in those markets.
At CenterPoint, the company president, Paul S. Fisher, said he was relieved to be free of the requirements of being a public company, including the more stringent accounting practices imposed by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, which he described as a distraction. As a public company, CenterPoint had to disclose information before a transaction was completed, giving its competitors an advantage, Mr. Fisher said.
In addition, he and Michael M. Mullen, the chief executive, had to spend too much of their time explaining their business to Wall Street, Mr. Fisher said. ''I'm now back doing transactions,'' he said.
But Dale Anne Reiss, who directs the global real estate practice at Ernst & Young, said that the availability of information had helped give the commercial real estate industry credibility. ''That's one of the things that's helped create the value in real estate,'' she said. ''Were we to lose that -- over a period of time, it could impact the values.''
SQUARE FEET
	Once you could find them every few blocks or so in prime neighborhoods of Manhattan, but these days the local chain supermarket seems to be heading the way of the five-and-dime. Among the latest casualties is a D'Agostino market on University Place near Union Square, which is closing after two decades in that location.
The last A.& P. in Manhattan, at 70th Street and West End Avenue, shut its doors in January. Gristedes, which has 39 supermarkets in Manhattan, gave up a store it has had for 30 years at 62nd Street and Second Avenue after being outbid by Chase Bank, said John A. Catsimatidis, chief executive of the chain.
''If you look at the previous 10 years,'' Mr. Catsimatidis said, ''you have 50 percent fewer supermarkets than you had then, and going forward 10 years the number will probably halve again.''
New Yorkers are not exactly going hungry, but their shopping habits have changed. These days, apartment dwellers are likely to find themselves walking a bit farther than they used to, buying meat and produce in one place and staples in another. Many supermarkets that once occupied 6,000 to 10,000 square feet have been replaced by chain drugstores that also carry paper towels and cereal, often at lower prices.
In Manhattan, the number of food stores that are 5,000 square feet or larger has actually grown in the last decade, to 196 from 154, because markets are turning up in neighborhoods that were previously underserved, according to Lawrence Sarf, the president of F&D Reports, a retail consulting company in Great Neck, N.Y. But, he said, the proportion of markets on the Upper West Side, Upper East Side and Midtown had declined to about 30 percent of the total, from 70 percent.
Escalating rents, especially in prime Manhattan neighborhoods, are helping to drive out traditional supermarkets. On Third Avenue and Broadway, banks -- Commerce Bank, Washington Mutual and Wachovia, among others -- are willing to pay $250 a square foot a year or more for storefronts that once commanded a fraction of that rent.
''This last deluge of bank expansions has escalated value of retail space, almost everywhere, way past what a normal retailer can pay,'' said C. Bradley Mendelson, an executive director at Cushman & Wakefield.
Supermarkets are a low-margin business, in part because a large proportion of their stock consists of perishable goods. A decade or so ago, a supermarket would pay an amount equivalent to 2 percent of its sales in rent in affluent neighborhoods, Mr. Catsimatidis said. Now, it has to pay as much as 8 percent of sales, he said. To hold onto a store on University Place and Eighth Street, Mr. Catsimatidis said, he had to agree to twice the previous rent.
One small supermarket chain, Morton Williams Associated Markets, would like to expand -- the company has 10 New York stores, 8 of them in Manhattan -- but has been unable to find space it can afford, said Morton Sloan, one of the owners.
Food City Markets once had six stores in Manhattan and is now down to one, at Columbus Avenue and 94th Street. ''When a supermarket decides to pay big rents, they've got to get big prices in the store,'' said Jeffrey L. Berger, the chief executive of Food City, which has two stores outside Manhattan. ''The customers don't understand. You don't make any friends.'' High rents, however, are not the sole reason traditional supermarkets are disappearing.
Supermarkets are having a tough time everywhere. In the suburbs, they are being squeezed by competition from discount retailers like Wal-Mart. In New York, particularly Manhattan, much of the pressure is coming from the opposite direction -- upscale markets like Whole Foods Market and Citarella that cater to less price-conscious customers and carry a large selection of prepared foods, which can be marked up higher, making them more profitable for store owners.
''You're dealing with a city with an incredibly large affluent population that can afford to shop on a regular basis at specialty shops,'' said Benjamin Fox, an executive vice president at the real estate firm Newmark Knight Frank.
In contrast to the older chains, most of these specialty shops employ nonunion labor. Pat Purcell, the director of organization for the United Food and Commercial Workers Union Local 1500, which has 23,000 New York area members, said that as specialty stores had come to play a more important role, the proportion of unionized supermarket employees had declined to about 50 percent, from 70 percent a decade ago.
Many Manhattan customers have been all too willing to desert their local supermarket, with its narrow aisles cluttered with cartons, dirty floors and indifferent service, retail specialists say.
''The supermarkets have been inferior for decades,'' said Burt P. Flickinger III, the managing director of Strategic Resource Group, a retail consulting group.
Often, co-op boards and developers would prefer to have a gourmet store as a tenant, or, better still, a retailer outside the food industry. ''The buildings don't want the vermin; they'd rather have a drugstore,'' said Jeff Winick, the chief executive of the Winick Realty Group, a brokerage company that has represented Duane Reade in about 250 lease transactions in the last 10 years.
FreshDirect, the online grocery service, has also made a big impact in the New York area since it opened its Long Island City plant in 2002. The company has about 150,000 customers and takes in about $200 million a year -- as much as 80 percent of it coming from Manhattan, a spokeswoman said.
''FreshDirect is putting a dent into everybody -- a big dent,'' Mr. Sarf said. He estimated that Manhattan grocery shoppers spend $2.1 billion a year.
Some supermarket chains, like Mr. Sloan's, are trying to compete with the gourmet stores by offering more takeout food. A.& P. recently announced plans to upgrade its 16 Food Emporium stores in Manhattan.
A.& P. officials did not respond to requests for an interview. But at a March 1 investors' meeting sponsored by CIBC, Christian W. E. Haub, the executive chairman of the Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company, said the new Food Emporium concept was designed ''to really attract the kind of consumer who does not care about price, where it's all about quality and service.''
One particularly challenging location for Food Emporium and other conventional supermarkets is Union Square, where the competition includes the city's premier Greenmarket, a Whole Foods store, a Garden of Eden market and the city's first Trader Joe's. Even before the arrival of Whole Foods, the D'Agostino market that occupies 6,000 square feet in a four-story commercial building at 64 University Place, three blocks from Union Square, was not successful, according to the landlord, Bernard Posner.
Mr. Posner, an owner of Bernard-Charles Realty, said the supermarket's rent was $84.70 a square foot plus a percentage of earnings over $15 million. ''They never reached that amount,'' he said.
Nicholas D'Agostino III, the chief executive of the third-generation family business, declined to comment.
Now that D'Agostino is leaving, Mr. Posner said he had raised the asking rent to $135 a square foot. He said he hoped the next tenant would be another supermarket or an upscale restaurant.
''We may end up with a chain drugstore,'' he said, ''but we'll try to avoid it if we can.''
Square Feet
	After two decades in the same location -- a town house on 57th Street just west of Fifth Avenue -- Ascot Chang, a retailer of custom-made shirts that cost as much as $650, found itself facing an uncertain future. The building had a new owner and the store's $40,000-a-month lease was set to expire in 2007.
So, like an apartment dweller eager to break free from the risks of renting, Ascot Chang decided to buy its own storefront. Recently the company, which is based in Hong Kong, agreed to pay $4 million for 4,700 square feet of ground-floor space at the former Intercontinental Hotel on Central Park South. The hotel is being converted into residential units.
''It's the Chinese mentality,'' said Thomas Yu, the general manager of United States operations for Ascot Chang, which also owns its store in Beverly Hills. ''We'd rather own our own store so that we don't have to move all the time.'' The purchase is expected to be completed in May.
It is still relatively rare in this country for retailers other than big-box chains like Wal-Mart and Home Depot to own their real estate. But with the wave of conversions, especially in New York, developers who specialize in residential or office construction are increasingly carving out a separate condo for their ground-floor space and putting it on the market. Prices for these retail spaces -- usually sold as condos, but occasionally as co-ops -- are rising rapidly.
According to Real Capital Analytics, a New York real estate company that tracks transactions of $5 million or more, $1.2 billion worth of retail condos across the country were sold in 2004 and 2005 combined, compared with $120.8 million in 2002 and 2003. From 2001 to 2005, the average sales price rose from $441 a square foot to $995 a square foot, said Robert M. White Jr., the company president.
''I think the high pricing that's been achieved by some of these retail condos is going to cause more investors to look real hard at their retail space,'' Mr. White said. ''More of them will create retail condos and sell it off separately.''
Hessam Nadji, the managing director of research services for Marcus & Millichap, an investment brokerage company based in Encino, Calif., has identified about 250 retail condos on the market across the country. Of those aimed at retailers, rather than investors, the average asking price is about $285 a square foot, he said.
Brokers say that more of these properties are coming on the market. ''It used to be that developers would hold onto the retail when they converted the building,'' said James P. Nelson, a managing partner at Massey Knakal, an investment brokerage company that specializes in smaller New York properties, ''but now they see that when space is vacant, they can get a premium.''
Stephen L. Glascock, the president of Anbau Enterprises, the developer of 110 Central Park South where the Intercontinental once operated, said his investors had always planned to sell the retail space. ''We're not in the retail business,'' he said. ''We're in the business of residential development.''
Some sellers are seizing the moment. After holding onto 18,000 square feet of retail space with small neighborhood stores at 275 and 295 Greenwich Street in TriBeCa for nearly two decades, the Shaw Company of Chicago decided last year that it was time to sell, said Bruce Sinder, the president of Sinvin Realty, which represented Shaw.
A new project is rising across the street that will have a Whole Foods store, and several of the existing leases are about to expire, Mr. Sinder said. A company owned by the developer Donald Zucker bought the retail condo in December for $13.75 million. ''He was buying for the future,'' Mr. Sinder said.
Retail condos attract several types of buyers. Some seek to defer payment of capital gains by exchanging property of similar value under Section 1031 of the federal tax code, as the Shorenstein family of San Francisco did last year when it bought the Borders Books space on 57th Street and Park Avenue for an undisclosed price.
Others are foreign retailers, accustomed to owning real estate in their home countries. Parasuco Jeans, a Montreal company that sells jeans for $150 to $800, is about to open its first United States store in 6,000 square feet of ground-floor space in a former bank building at Spring and Lafayette Streets in SoHo.
''Why throw money away on rent if you can own the place?'' said Salvatore Parasuco, the chief executive of the company, which bought the store for $8.5 million from Leviev Boymelgreen, the developer that converted the rest of the building into residential condos. Some foreign retailers are so eager to acquire real estate that they are willing to become residential landlords or move to less-than-ideal locations. Custo Barcelona, an apparel chain based in Spain, recently bought a four-story building on Columbus Avenue and 71st Street with apartments on the three upper floors, said Joshua Strauss, a managing director at Robert K. Futterman & Associates, a retail brokerage company.
Custo Barcelona also owns a retail condo on Broome Street. ''Broome Street is not the best location,'' he said. ''You'd rather be on Broadway. But they still want to buy, and only buy.''
Most of the costliest retail condos, however, are being sold to real estate investors. One of the most active buyers is the publicly traded Vornado Realty Trust, which set a record -- $6,647 a square foot) -- last May when it paid $113 million for retail space in the former Westbury Hotel, a residential conversion on Madison Avenue at 69th Street, that is leased until 2018 by the luxury retailers Cartier and Gucci.
Even condos with less glamorous tenants are commanding high prices. Storefronts on Lexington Avenue and 59th Street that are leased to the Gap and Banana Republic recently sold for $2,800 a square foot.
Chain stores based in this country are not in the habit of owning their real estate, brokers say. ''Americans don't do it because it takes away capital they need to expand their business,'' said Alan Victor, an executive vice president of the Lansco Corporation, which represents tenants. ''Most would rather open another store and generate more revenue.''
One United States company that prefers owning to renting is Valley National Bank of Wayne, N.J., which has nine branches in Manhattan and four more set to open this year. Banks have been rapidly expanding in Manhattan, paying annual rents of $200 a square foot or more.
Gerald H. Lipkin, the chief executive of Valley National for the last 17 years, said he liked the predictability that goes along with ownership. ''If you own, you've locked in your fixed costs for eternity,'' he said. And what if the branch fails at that location? ''So I sell it,'' he said.
For the most part though, retailers who own their space tend to be local entrepreneurs, Mr. Nadji said.
Several years ago, Howard A. Ellins and his wife, Jocelyn Serfaty, decided to turn a longtime interest in Asian antiques into a retail business. It took two years for them to find a retail condo in the right location for their store, Abhaya Home Furnishings, but eventually they bought a 5,000-square-foot space at 145 Hudson Street in TriBeCa for $1.8 million.
Had they rented space, the lease would have expired in a few years, forcing them to confront the higher rents that have accompanied the neighborhood's escalating residential prices, said Mr. Ellins, who retired this year as a litigator at Davis Polk & Wardwell. ''This was the more sensible way for us to go at it,'' he said.
Square Feet
	