A program offering tax credits to jobless workers to buy health insurance has gotten off to a slow, sputtering start, despite energetic efforts by Bush administration officials who want the program to succeed as a model for a much more ambitious effort to help the uninsured.
The program, the Health Coverage Tax Credit, was created in 2002 to aid workers who lose jobs because of foreign imports.
With health care shaping up as a big issue in this year's elections, President Bush and other Republicans see the program as an important prototype. They hope to give similar tax credits to a much larger swath of the uninsured population, which exceeds 43 million.
Administration officials have hailed the program for displaced workers. In a letter to governors last February, Treasury Secretary John W. Snow and Tommy G. Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, said the tax credit ''could help over 500,000 Americans each year.'' And Mr. Snow described it last summer as ''a real innovation in tax policy, a bold step in the direction of affordable health care for all Americans.''
But the results to date are modest, in part because displaced workers are still required to spend substantial amounts of money on insurance premiums before they can get the benefits of the tax credit.
At the end of December, the Bush administration said, only 8,374 workers were receiving tax credits for health insurance under the program. The total number of people taking advantage of the program, including dependents, is perhaps 25,000, or 5 percent of those expected to benefit.
While the program has yet to enjoy wide success, President Bush proposed wider use of tax credits in his State of the Union address on Tuesday and in his weekly radio address on Saturday.
''I ask you to give lower-income Americans a refundable tax credit that would allow millions to buy their own basic health insurance,'' Mr. Bush said in his speech to Congress.
Under the existing program, tax credits will pay 65 percent of the premium for health insurance bought by a displaced worker. The individual must pay the other 35 percent, and that has proved an insurmountable hurdle for some workers.
''The tax credit would help if the insurance rates were affordable, but the rates were so high that I couldn't afford it,'' said Gloria J. Craven, 51, of Eden, N.C. ''Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina stepped forward to help the textile workers here. But when people started getting price quotes, we realized that we could not pay our share of the premiums.''
Mrs. Craven said she and her 61-year-old husband had lost their jobs in a Pillowtex mill where they worked for three decades. She has asthma. He is diabetic and has had a heart attack. Mrs. Craven said the premiums for the insurance offered to them ranged from $1,700 to $5,400 a month. Their share of the premiums would be $595 to $1,890 a month.
The couple, drawing $416 a month in unemployment benefits, was in no position to pay such costs, Mrs. Craven said.
Federal officials estimate that 14,000 workers are eligible for the tax credit in North Carolina. Michelle Douglas, a spokeswoman for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina, said 1,800 workers had signed up for the health plan offered to displaced workers.
''There is a product available, but it's not as affordable as we had hoped,'' Ms. Douglas said.
The tax credit was approved by Congress as part of a trade bill that gave the president broad authority to negotiate trade deals.
Senator Olympia J. Snowe, Republican of Maine, one of the chief proponents of the tax credit, said: ''We have to find out immediately what's limiting the success of this program. We are talking about health insurance for people who have lost their jobs. The delays are troubling and unacceptable.''
Ms. Snowe said Maine had lost nearly one-fourth of its manufacturing jobs since 2000. Federal officials estimate that 2,000 people are eligible for the tax credit there. State officials say the number could be as high as 13,000.
But Ellen J. Schneiter, an aide to Gov. John Baldacci of Maine, a Democrat, said that fewer than 200 people were using the tax credit.
''We thought these folks were really hungry for health care coverage, but they can't pay their 35 percent share,'' Ms. Schneiter said. The premium for a family that includes a person over the age of 55 is $1,500 a month, or $18,000 a year, she said.
Federal officials said the average premium for family coverage under state-based health insurance programs was about $800 a month, or $9,600 a year.
Eligible individuals can claim the credit when they file their tax returns, or they can get it in advance, by arranging for the Treasury Department to make monthly payments to insurers. The credit is available to taxpayers and to those who do not owe federal income tax.
Roy J. Ramthun, senior adviser on health initiatives at the Treasury, said: ''We are surprised that more people have not signed up for the advance payment option. We've tried to do everything we can to make the process of qualifying for the credit as simple as possible.''
The credit is available not only to workers laid off because of foreign competition, but also to some retirees who receive payments from the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation because of the failure of their pension plans.
But so far, only 29 states have taken action to designate health plans that will provide coverage to people receiving the tax credit.
As a result, ''an eligible individual may have a 65 percent tax credit, but no place to spend it,'' said Janet S. Trautwein, vice president of the National Association of Health Underwriters.
In Texas, the federal government estimates that more than 8,600 people are eligible. But only 29 people are receiving it, according to Margaret Jarvis, a spokeswoman for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas, which operates the health plan for displaced workers.
''We expect the program to grow,'' Ms. Jarvis said, ''but there's nothing we're doing to promote it.''
In New York, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield says that fewer than 10 people are taking advantage of its program for displaced workers.
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Michigan says that more than 7,500 workers are eligible, but only 420 have signed up. The premium for a comprehensive family policy is $1,074 a month.
''If you're out of work, you might not be able to afford your share of that, $375 a month,'' said Timothy P. Cook, a spokesman for Michigan Blue Cross.
Federal officials said they had made substantial progress, setting up telephone call centers and establishing procedures for the Treasury to make monthly payments.
''We have demonstrated that the model works,'' said Ruben J. King-Shaw Jr., who ran the program for the Bush administration until he left the government in August. ''For the first time, tax credits are being used to address the problems of the uninsured. But workers are still finding out about the program. And some states have been more aggressive than others in making an insurance product available.''
The Children's Health Insurance Program, created by Congress in 1997, was also slow in getting started, federal and state officials recalled, but enrollment has increased.
In Illinois, Thomas F. Jerkovitz, executive director of the state's Comprehensive Health Insurance Plan, said he was puzzled by the fact that only 345 of the 12,000 workers eligible for the tax credit had enrolled. ''We are scratching our heads,'' Mr. Jerkovitz said.
In Ohio, 835 people have signed up. The federal government says more than 16,000 are eligible.
Ann Womer Benjamin, director of the Ohio Insurance Department, said: ''I've been a bit disappointed. This is a very positive program with great potential, but we have to do more to publicize it and to reach people who may be eligible.''
	The Bush administration is headed for a confrontation with states over the financing of Medicaid, the nation's largest health program, as federal officials crack down on arrangements used by many states to shift costs to the federal government.
The federal action comes as states, struggling with severe fiscal problems, are cutting benefits and restricting eligibility for the program, which serves 50 million low-income people each year.
Federal officials and auditors contend that states use creative bookkeeping and other ploys to obtain large amounts of federal Medicaid money without paying their share.
Washington and the states split Medicaid costs, with the federal government paying 50 percent and sometimes more than 70 percent.
But in many cases, the Bush administration says, states have paid their share with ''phantom dollars,'' instead of state or local tax revenues.
State officials acknowledge their desire to make the most of federal Medicaid payments at a time when health costs are soaring. The National Conference of State Legislatures advises its members on ''Medicaid maximization'' strategies and says such techniques are legitimate and desperately needed to avoid cutting benefits for poor people.
The dispute will be high on the agenda when the National Governors Association holds its winter meeting here beginning Saturday.
The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, recently added Medicaid to its list of high-risk programs. It said, ''States have used various financing schemes to generate excessive federal Medicaid matching funds while their own share of expenditures has remained unchanged or decreased.''
In some cases, it said, ''states have created the illusion that they have made large Medicaid payments'' to county hospitals and nursing homes, and they claimed federal Medicaid money to help defray the costs, even as they required counties to return most of the money to the state.
Federal investigators have found such practices in Alabama, Illinois, Michigan, Nebraska, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Washington, among other states.
In his new budget, President Bush said he could save $1.5 billion next year and $23.6 billion in the coming decade by restoring the ''fiscal integrity'' of Medicaid.
''The Medicaid program must be a federal-state partnership, not an exercise in financial gamesmanship,'' said Dennis G. Smith, the top federal official for Medicaid.
Mr. Smith said states were using ''complex, creative financing schemes'' and exploiting loopholes in federal laws and regulations to ''shift a larger portion of Medicaid costs to the federal government.''
When Mr. Bush took office, he vowed to speed the approval of changes in state Medicaid programs after a large backlog had accumulated. But the process has bogged down as federal officials try to ferret out improprieties in Medicaid financing.
Melanie M. Bella, the Medicaid director in Indiana, said she had been negotiating with federal officials for nearly a year on a proposal to increase payments to doctors from the Indiana University School of Medicine who care for Medicaid patients at the county Wishard Memorial Hospital in Indianapolis.
The county is willing to pay the state's share of the extra cost. But the Bush administration says it wants to curb such ''intergovernmental transfers'' because they have been abused in the past to gain what the budget described as ''inordinate amounts of federal Medicaid funds.''
''It would be a real hardship if we cannot use county tax money,'' Ms. Bella said. ''This is headed down a path that will increase the number of uninsured. With the proposed restrictions on our use of state and local revenue, states will have to cut services, reduce payments to health care providers or eliminate groups of recipients.''
Dr. Ron J. Anderson, president of Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas, said: ''Intergovernmental transfer payments have been a godsend. They keep us alive.''
Alan G. Rosenbloom, president of the Pennsylvania Health Care Association, a lobby group for nursing homes, said the federal proposals ''threaten access to care, the quality of care and the viability of nursing homes.''
In Pennsylvania, he said, ''county money is used to leverage federal money, which benefits both public and private nursing homes.''
New York spends more on Medicaid than any other state does. It has long required counties to pay some expenses, 25 percent of the cost of hospital services, for example.
Though federal officials have not publicly challenged this arrangement, state officials say they have been stymied in winning approval for extra payments to public hospitals run by the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation and the State University of New York.
In a notice published this month in the Federal Register and in the draft of a letter to state Medicaid directors, the Bush administration said it would soon require states to provide a detailed description of ''each source of revenue'' used to pay their share of Medicaid costs.
Under the plan, state Medicaid budgets would be subject to federal approval, and states could not draw federal money for extra costs ''unless and until the expenditures are approved'' at the federal level.
State officials bristled at the prospect of such a change.
''The new system would be a radical departure from the current open-ended system of Medicaid cash reimbursement,'' said Vic Miller, a senior fellow at Federal Funds Information for States, a joint project of the governors' association and the legislatures' conference.
Mary B. Kennedy, the Medicaid director in Minnesota, said: ''Federal officials see themselves as having prior approval over state budgets. State legislators do not see that as a proper role.''
Charles A. Miller, a Washington lawyer who has represented state governments for more than 25 years, suggested that the federal scrutiny was ''intended to put pressure on states to come around to supporting or accepting a block grant,'' with fixed allotments of federal money. Mr. Bush made such a proposal last year, but it gained little traction in Congress or among governors.
Federal and state Medicaid spending shot up nearly 60 percent in the last five years, to more than $265 billion in 2003, and federal officials say it will double in the coming decade as the population ages.
Kathryn G. Allen, a health care specialist at the General Accounting Office, said: ''State financing schemes have driven up federal Medicaid costs. Congress has repeatedly tried to curtail such arrangements, but states have consistently developed new variations.''
In one example described by Tommy G. Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, county nursing homes borrowed $1.5 billion from a commercial bank. The money was transferred to a state account, then to the counties, which paid the loan. The state, which Secretary Thompson did not name, claimed it had spent the full amount on medical care and drew down more than $800 million in federal payments.
Senator Don Nickles, Republican of Oklahoma and chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, said: ''I am outraged at this practice. It needs to be stopped.''
	The Bush administration says it improperly altered a report documenting large racial and ethnic disparities in health care, but it will soon publish the full, unexpurgated document.
''There was a mistake made,'' Tommy G. Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, told Congress last week. ''It's going to be rectified.''
Mr. Thompson said that ''some individuals took it upon themselves'' to make the report sound more positive than was justified by the data.
The reversal comes in response to concerns of Democrats and the Senate majority leader, Bill Frist, Republican of Tennessee. They are pushing separate bills to improve care for members of minorities.
''African-Americans and Native Americans die younger than any other racial or ethnic group,'' Dr. Frist said. ''African-Americans, Native Americans and Hispanic Americans are at least twice as likely to suffer from diabetes and experience serious complications. These gaps are unacceptable.''
President Bush's budget would cut spending for the training of health professionals and would eliminate a $34 million program that recruits blacks and Hispanics for careers as doctors, nurses and pharmacists.
On Wednesday, more than 60 influential scientists, including 20 Nobel laureates, issued a statement criticizing what they described as the misuse of science by the administration to bolster its policies on the environment, arms control and public health.
Representative Henry A. Waxman, Democrat of California, said the changes in the report on health disparities were ''another example of the administration's manipulation of science to fit its political goals.''
But William A. Pierce, a spokesman for the Department of Health and Human Services, said the changes had occurred as part of a ''routine review process'' and were not intended to minimize the problem.
The report, the first of its kind, was prepared under a 1999 law that requires officials to issue such reports every year.
The theme of the original report was that members of minorities ''tend to be in poorer health than other Americans'' and that ''disparities are pervasive in our health care system,'' contributing to higher rates of disease and disability.
By contrast, the final report has an upbeat tone, beginning, ''The overall health of Americans has improved dramatically over the last century.''
The report was prepared by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, led by Dr. Carolyn M. Clancy. Administration officials said that she and her researchers had fought hard, at some professional risk, to protect the integrity of the report, but eventually went along with the revisions.
''No data or statistics in the report were altered in any way whatsoever,'' Dr. Clancy said. But a close reading of the evolving report shows that some entries in statistical tables were deleted from the final version.
The final report acknowledges that ''some socioeconomic, racial, ethnic and geographic differences exist.'' It says, ''There is no implication that these differences result in adverse health outcomes or imply moral error or prejudice in any way.''
But Dr. Alan R. Nelson, a former president of the American Medical Association, said a large body of evidence suggested that ''unconscious biases and stereotypes among physicians and nurses may play a role in causing racial and ethnic disparities.'' Dr. Nelson led a study of the issue by a committee of the National Academy of Sciences.
Prof. M. Gregg Bloche of Georgetown University, a member of the committee, said: ''The administration's report does not fabricate data, but misrepresents the findings. It submerges evidence of profound disparities in an optimistic message about the overall excellence of the health care system.''
Dr. Sally L. Satel, a psychiatrist and scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, said that agreeing to issue the original report, ''Secretary Thompson succumbed to political pressure that was applied by members of Congress who are identified with ethnic causes.'' Critics, she said, have grossly exaggerated the significance of changes in the report.
Among those who wanted to rewrite the report was Arthur J. Lawrence, a deputy assistant secretary of health and human services.
''The present draft remains highly focused on the health care system's supposed failings and flaws,'' Mr. Lawrence said in a memorandum to Mr. Thompson last fall. ''In short, the report lacks balance.''
Mr. Lawrence said that geography, income and other factors could be more important than race. For example, he said, whites in rural northern Maine may have worse heart problems than blacks in big cities. In addition, he said, the report should place more emphasis on ''personal responsibility for one's own health status'' and on ''problems with the medical malpractice system.''
The original version of the report included these statements, which were dropped from the final version:
*''We aspire to equality of opportunities for all our citizens. Persistent disparities in health care are inconsistent with our core values.''
*''Disparities come at a personal and societal price.''
*''Compared with whites, blacks experience longer waits in emergency departments and are more likely to leave without being seen.''
*When hospitalized for heart attacks, ''Hispanics are less likely to receive optimal care.''
The original report included a stark, prominent statement that ''black children have much higher hospitalization rates for asthma than white children.'' The final version included the data, without comment.
	