At a time when considerable political attention is focused on the Democrats' uphill struggle to recapture Congress, leaders of both parties say Democrats appear to be in a much stronger position on another pivotal battlefield this November, the contests for governors.
Democrats have a strong chance to pick up a number of seats held by Republicans while keeping seats even in states that President Bush won in 2004, potentially allowing Democrats to put their view of government on display across a bigger swath of the country and strengthening their position for the 2008 presidential race, party officials said.
Among the states that could flip to the Democratic column are Arkansas, Colorado, Florida, Nevada and Ohio, all general election battlegrounds carried by Mr. Bush, as well as New York and perhaps California.
''From a math standpoint, we've got a tough row to hoe this year,'' Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, the head of the Republican Governors Association, said as the National Governors Association gathered here this weekend for its annual Washington meeting.
Mr. Romney, whose decision not to seek re-election as he explores a run for president has put his own state in play for Democrats, said Republicans could suffer a net loss of as many as four governorships if the political environment for his party did not improve.
Some Democrats and independent analysts said the shift could end up being even more pronounced if the problems that have plagued Republicans in Washington continue to mount and Mr. Bush remains politically weakened. They said the furor over a Dubai company's taking over some operations at six American ports had provided them another opportunity to put Republicans on the defensive. They noted that Gov. Robert L. Ehrlich Jr. of Maryland, a vulnerable incumbent, was among the first Republicans to step forward to question the deal, which includes the Baltimore port.
''I think we can pick up between five and seven,'' said Howard Dean, the Democratic national chairman. ''This is going to be a national election if I have anything to do with it: a national referendum on whether you want Republicans to keep running this country and whether you want them to keep running your state.''
Jennifer Duffy, an analyst for The Cook Political Report who tracks national races, said of Democrats, ''If they don't get a majority, they are going to come awfully close.'' The Democrats would need a net gain of four governorships for a majority.
Beyond the potentially considerable effect on education, health, transportation and other policy issues in the states, the outcome could have substantial implications for the 2008 presidential race. As Mr. Bush showed in Ohio and Florida, having a friendly governor can be critical in close general elections. As a result, this year's contests are of considerable interest to presidential contenders in both parties, many of whom are current or former governors.
''People underestimate the value of a Republican governor during a presidential cycle,'' said Gov. Mike Huckabee, the Republican governor of Arkansas and a potential presidential candidate. ''It helps a lot.''
The potential shift is a result of a political map of statehouses that is as challenging to Republicans as the Congressional map is difficult for Democrats. There are 22 Republican governor seats in contention, compared with 14 for Democrats.
State economies are generally doing well, helping to increase tax revenue, pay for new or expanded programs and provide a positive environment for incumbents. But whatever advantage the economy may hold for Republicans is offset to some degree by term limits, which are forcing many of their incumbents to step aside. Five sitting Republicans, including Jeb Bush in Florida and Mr. Huckabee, are barred from running again, creating open seats. No Democratic governor is facing a term limit this year.
There are now 28 Republican governors and 22 Democratic. Seven Republicans are not seeking re-election, in Arkansas, Colorado, Florida, Massachusetts, Nevada, New York and Ohio. Only one Democrat is stepping aside: Tom Vilsack of Iowa, who is looking at a run for president.
''It's not a pretty picture out there,'' said Joe Gaylord, a Republican consultant.
Democrats do have some of their own problems for November.
In Pennsylvania, Gov. Edward G. Rendell, a Democrat seeking a second term, is girding for a prospectively strong challenge from Lynn Swann, the former star football player for the Pittsburgh Steelers. In Michigan, Gov. Jennifer M. Granholm, one of the Democrats' most poised candidates, is struggling with a sour economy and facing a well-financed challenge from Richard M. DeVos, a former chairman and co-founder of the Amway Corporation.
Republicans said they hoped to mount a strong challenge to Gov. James E. Doyle, a Wisconsin Democrat, with Representative Mark Green. To a lesser extent, Democrats said they were concerned about keeping Maine, Oregon and Illinois.
And the decision by Mr. Vilsack not to seek re-election means Democrats could lose Iowa. ''It's a very tough seat,'' Mr. Vilsack said Saturday. ''The state has only elected seven Democrats in our history.''
Still, Republicans seem to be in a tougher spot. Analysts said Democrats had a chance of picking up Alaska, Arkansas, Colorado, Maryland, Massachusetts, Nevada, New York, Ohio and -- possibly, though less likely -- Alabama, California, Florida and Minnesota.
''Massachusetts, Arkansas are really Democratic states, but we have Republican governors,'' Mr. Huckabee said. ''I think we can keep a Republican governor in Arkansas, but it's going to be a challenge.''
To the frustration of Republican leaders, Democratic governors in states where Mr. Bush won convincingly in 2004 seem to be doing very well, including those in Arizona, Kansas, Oklahoma and Wyoming.
Of all the states in play, the most closely watched is probably Ohio, where Gov. Bob Taft is being forced out by term limits, under a cloud of scandal that has left Republicans fearful of a rout this November. Representative Ted Strickland is the most likely Democratic candidate.
To the delight of some Democrats, a fierce primary has broken out on the Republican side between J. Kenneth Blackwell, the secretary of state, and Jim Petro, the attorney general.
''I wish we could have the election yesterday,'' Mr. Strickland said. ''Right now, Democrats are in a superb position in Ohio.''
Presidential contenders are paying particularly close mind to what is happening in states likely to be at the center of the 2008 presidential race.
''Governorships are important to the presidential races,'' Mr. Romney said. ''I don't want to overstate that, but I would think it helped in Florida to have the president's brother there.''
Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico, the head of the Democratic Governors Association and a potential presidential candidate, said: ''People caring about '08 should really care about '06 and the governors' races. Governors are where the future of politics are.''
For Republicans, the other concern is the potential for the outcome of this year's races to influence the legislative redistricting that will follow the 2010 census, especially if 2006 is the beginning of a resurgence in the national strength of the Democrats. Mr. Gaylord said the 2006 election could be parallel to 1994, when Republicans made national gains that put them in a commanding position when it came time to redraw district lines after the 2000 census.
Mr. Gaylord said one reason Republicans did so well in the 2002 Congressional elections was because of Republican successes in 1994. ''It went so deep at the state and local levels that the Democrats could never turn it back around,'' he said.
Democratic governors were clearly confident as they confronted the Bush administration on issues including port security, health care and immigration, in what amounted to a map for the campaign ahead.
Gov. Kathleen Sebelius, a Kansas Democrat who is favored in her re-election bid in a state where Mr. Bush won 62 percent of the vote, said ethics and competence would be among the most crucial issues for Democrats in 2006.
''People demand competence at a bare minimum,'' she said. ''They want to believe that elected officials have their best interests at heart, not special interests.''
	From Arizona to Pennsylvania, from Colorado to Connecticut, Democratic candidates for Congress are reading from a stack of different scripts these days.
At the Capitol in Hartford the other morning, State Senator Christopher Murphy denounced the ''disastrous prescription drug benefit bill'' embraced by his Republican opponent, Representative Nancy L. Johnson.
Jeff Latas, a Democratic candidate in an Arizona race, is talking about the nation's dangerous reliance on oil imports from the Middle East. Ed Perlmutter, a Colorado Democrat, says he is running against ''the arrogance and cronyism'' displayed by Washington Republicans.
And in New Mexico, Patricia Madrid, the state attorney general, is urging the United States to set a timetable for quitting Iraq.
''We have a lot to run on,'' said Ms. Madrid, who is trying to unseat Representative Heather A. Wilson.
These scattershot messages reflect what officials in both parties say are vulnerabilities among Republicans on Capitol Hill, as well as President Bush's weakened political condition in this election year.
But they also reflect splits within the party about what it means to be a Democrat -- and what a winning Democratic formula will be -- after years in which conservative ideas have dominated the national policy debate and helped win elections.
And they complicate the basic strategy being pursued by Democratic leaders in Washington to capture control of Congress: to turn this election into a national referendum on the party in power, much the way Republicans did against Democrats in 1994.
Interviews with Democratic challengers in contested districts suggest that the party is far from settling on an overarching theme that will work as well in central Connecticut as it does in central Colorado.
And while Democrats have no shortage of criticism to offer, they have so far not introduced a strategy for governing along the lines of the Republican Party's Contract With America, the 1994 initiative that some Democrats hold up as their model for this year's elections.
''It's certainly worth the effort, but it's damned hard to do,'' Charles O. Jones, a professor emeritus of political science at the University of Wisconsin in Madison, said of the Democratic effort to emulate the Republicans.
''If you're going to run a national campaign,'' as the Republicans did in 1994, Dr. Jones said, ''it's helpful to have a message, not just 'The other guys don't know what they are doing.' If Democrats are using that strategy, I haven't heard that message yet.''
Republican leaders, while acknowledging concern about the political environment for their party, said Democrats were paying a price for being out of power and failing to propose their own program of ideas. Representative Thomas M. Reynolds of New York, the head of the National Republican Congressional Committee, said Democrats were throwing things ''against the wall to see what will stick.''
The Democrats' struggle to turn 435 Congressional races into a national election, analysts and party officials said, is critical to their hopes of capturing the 15 Republican seats they need to win back control of the House.
From the perspective of the country's mood, Democrats could hardly ask for a more hospitable environment, analysts said. There is strong discontent among voters with the way Mr. Bush and the Republican-controlled Congress have led the country. Corruption investigations have implicated Republican members of Congress. There is anxiety over the war in Iraq and distress among retirees over the new Medicare prescription drug program.
But Democratic ambitions have run up against a diminished political playing field, narrowed by states' partisan redistricting efforts that have put the vast majority of Congressional seats out of play.
Of 435 House seats, just 32 are in races considered competitive, compared with 110 at this time in 1994, according to the nonpartisan Cook Political Report. Of those, 11 are held by Democrats and 21 by Republicans.
Unless the political environment changes to make more Republican seats vulnerable, or more Republican incumbents retire before November, Democrats will have to hold on to all 11 of their competitive seats and win 15 of the 21 Republican seats in order to take back the House. (Representative Bernard Sanders of Vermont is considered a Democrat, even though he officially lists himself as an Independent.)
More Republican retirements are certainly possible, including those of Representatives Bill Thomas of California and Sherwood L. Boehlert of New York, both senior members running up against their term limits as committee chairmen.
Representative Rahm Emanuel, Democrat of Illinois and head of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, said that Congressional elections had regularly turned on national issues over the past century, typically reflecting weariness with the party in power. Still, Mr. Emanuel said, his strategy is to no small extent born of necessity.
The Republicans ''gerrymandered this map,'' he said in an interview while campaigning for Mr. Murphy in Connecticut. ''You can't beat a gerrymandered map with the one-offs: a trick here and a trick there. You have got to nationalize it -- create something bigger than the map they've drawn.''
Representative Reynolds of New York said the Democratic strategy would fail, because Congressional elections are determined by local dynamics: voters, he said, are more likely to make decisions based on what their member of Congress has delivered for the district than on what happens in Washington.
''Anything is possible,'' Mr. Reynolds said. ''I mean, it's possible we're going to elect a Republican governor of New York. But is it likely? I'd say no,'' he said, reflecting widespread Republican pessimism about the party's strengths in his home state.
''Congress's approval rating is a little flat,'' he added. ''My self-esteem wants to see it a little higher. But it is what it is. The most important thing is people love their congressman, no matter what.''
In Iowa, Jeff Lamberti, the Republican co-president of the State Senate, who is challenging Representative Leonard L. Boswell, a Democrat, said: ''I'm not particularly concerned that the Third Congressional seat will be determined by some kind of nationalization of the election. The people of Iowa are going to make their decision based on who the candidates are on the ballot, how hard you work and how you connect with them.''
Of all the differences between now and 1994, perhaps most notable is that 12 years ago, 69 seats held by Democrats were up for grabs at this stage of the election cycle, compared with 21 Republican seats today.
But Amy Walter, an analyst for the Cook Political Report, said that as many as 25 additional Republican seats could become competitive by November. In most of those districts, Ms. Walter said, Democrats have good candidates in place.
Philip A. Klinkner, an associate professor of political science at Hamilton College in New York, said conditions were historically right for the Congressional election to turn on national issues.
''You tend to see it at times when you have really unpopular presidents or really popular presidents,'' Dr. Klinkner said.
As they try to encourage this development, Democrats have experimented with several themes: corruption in Washington, Medicare, a Republican Congress acting as a rubber stamp for the president, governmental incompetence and what Mr. Emanuel, borrowing a phrase from his former boss at the White House, President Bill Clinton, described as a choice between ''change and more of the same.''
The Democrats' effort would appear, at least from conversations with Democratic candidates, to be something of a work in progress. In Hartford, Mr. Murphy denounced restriction on stem cell research. In Indiana, Brad Ellsworth, the Vanderburgh County sheriff, criticized Representative John Hostettler, a Republican, for his vote against the Hurricane Katrina aid package.
State Senator Ron Klein of Florida, a Democratic challenger to Representative E. Clay Shaw Jr., a Republican, said, ''Medicare is the big issue in this area because we have so many seniors.''
Democrats pointed out that Republicans did not offer their Contract With America until the final weeks of the 1994 campaign and said that they were planning to offer their own version by summer.
Still, party officials said, it has been difficult to build a consensus. Some Democrats want to call for raising automobile mileage standards to conserve energy, but Democrats in Michigan have resisted that idea. While Democrats including Ms. Madrid of New Mexico want to set a timetable for pulling out of Iraq, others say that would be politically and militarily disastrous.
Mr. Emanuel, though, said he was not worried. ''What divide?'' he said.
''We agree on Social Security,'' he continued. ''We also agree on the war, which is, not more of the same.''
''Skelton has a position. Murtha has a position. Levin has a position,'' he said of Congressional Democrats who have raised questions about the war. ''But all of them have one thing in common: Staying the course is a fool's errand. O.K.? I'm happy that our party has a lot of different ideas about how to solve a problem.''
Correction:  March 8, 2006, Wednesday  A chart on Monday about closely contested Congressional races reversed the maps for the eighth and ninth districts of Indiana. The eighth district is in the west, the ninth in the southeast.
	Republicans gathered here this weekend acutely concerned with the elections ahead and distressed by the White House's performance since President Bush's re-election. They listened as a parade of prospective presidential candidates wrestled with how much to associate their campaigns with an increasingly unpopular sitting president.
In interviews, officials attending the Southern Republican Leadership Conference here described themselves as shaken by mistakes that have afflicted the White House, culminating with the collapse of the deal to allow a Dubai company to manage six American port terminals. Several urged the president to bring in new advisers to avoid losses in the midterm elections ahead and three fallow years in the White House.
Reflecting the political anxiety heading toward the 2008 election, the party's prospective presidential candidates, who spoke before about 2,000 here on Friday and Saturday, varied markedly in their handling of Mr. Bush as they dealt with what will clearly be a central strategic challenge for them.
Republicans said the complication for these candidates was that Mr. Bush remained highly popular with the party's conservative base, even in the face of deepening concerns across the electorate about his government and his policies.
On one side, Senator John McCain of Arizona offered a full embrace of a president he has quarreled with over the years -- Mr. Bush defeated him for the presidential nomination in an acrid campaign in 2000 -- as he urged Republicans to rally around Mr. Bush in a difficult time and to focus on the midterm elections ahead.
''We must keep our presidential ambitions a distant second to standing with the president of the United States,'' Mr. McCain said.
But in a hint of one way that this next generation of Republican presidential contenders is likely to diverge from the president, Mitt Romney, the governor of Massachusetts, went from heralding Mr. Bush's record on terrorism to embracing conservative concern about the growth of the size of government in his tenure.
''We are spending too much money,'' Mr. Romney said. ''Our discretionary spending -- taking out Iraq and mandatory spending -- grew 49 percent in four years. Our debt has grown. Pork is always dispiriting. But pork being spent at a time of war is particularly dispiriting.''
Senator George Allen of Virginia went from noting his support of Mr. Bush's tax cuts to calling for tough immigration controls that stood in obvious contrast to Mr. Bush's efforts to permit some illegal immigrants to work in the United States.
''Let's just say this: the president's position on all of this is not all that clear,'' Mr. Allen said after delivering his speech. ''I want to be plain and clear: what we need to do is secure our borders.''
Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee praised Mr. Bush's success at ''reshaping the federal judiciary,'' though he said that his own maneuvers as the Senate majority leader had stymied Democrats from using filibusters to block judges and cleared the way for Mr. Bush.
''Because we acted,'' Mr. Frist said, ''as we sit here today, a new chief justice -- Chief Justice John Roberts -- serves at the helm of the highest court in the land. And Sam Alito sits at his side.''
In addition to Mr. McCain, Mr. Romney and Mr. Allen, the other potential candidates who spoke included Mr. Frist, Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas and Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas.
Several Republicans said the huge turnout at the meeting, a biannual conference attended by elected officials and party members, was evidence that many were anxious for a respite from bad news and ready to look beyond the Bush presidency.
''There's a lot of frustration here -- we've had a run of real bad luck,'' said Tom Rath, a New Hampshire Republican leader. ''You've got such longevity in that White House team that they are tired. They need a break. They need a big piece of good luck. I don't know what it is.''
James H. Herring, the chairman of the Mississippi Republican Party, said, ''They need to minimize these self-inflicted wounds.''
Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina said of Mr. Bush: ''He's right about Social Security. He's right about the big things of his time. Executing has been a problem. Implementing has been a problem.''
At the same time, Mr. Graham criticized his own party for allowing spending to increase, noting that Mr. Bush had yet to veto a single spending bill. ''We're growing the government at a pace that makes Democrats look thrifty,'' he said.
Several Republicans here said Mr. Bush urgently needed to shake up his staff. Senator Norm Coleman, Republican of Minnesota, pointed to what he described as a series of management and political failures as he urged Mr. Bush to bring in a new team.
''There is some question about whether those around him have served him well,'' Mr. Coleman said. ''This president has strong support in the United States Senate -- in many ways, a lot of our fates are tied to him. We want him to be popular, we want the public to support him. But there have been problems.''
Some senior Republicans with ties to the White House, who asked for anonymity because they did not want to be identified describing internal White House deliberations, said there was a widespread feeling here that Mr. Bush would be well served to bring in new advisers, either replacing Andrew H. Card Jr., his chief of staff, or Karl Rove, his senior political adviser.
But one Republican with close ties to the White House said the investigation of Mr. Rove's role in leaking the name of a C.I.A. operative was making it nearly impossible to make any changes until it was resolved.
The session here was brimming with Republican faces new and old, drawn by the prospect of getting a first glimpse of the party's presidential lineup for 2008. The strong interest reflects the fact that this is perhaps the most wide-open Republican primary since 1980, when Ronald Reagan was nominated.
The session culminated with a straw poll of delegates, organized by The Hotline, a political newsletter. The results were clouded by a request by Mr. McCain that his supporters cast write-in votes for President Bush, as a show of support for the president.
Mr. Frist won 37 percent of the 1,427 ballots cast, an unsurprising result in his home state: 82 percent of his votes came from Tennessee.
Mr. Romney came in second with 14 percent of the vote.
Mr. Bush and Mr. Allen tied at 10 percent, while Mr. McCain drew 5 percent, Mr. Huckabee 4 percent and Mr. Brownback 1.5 percent.
The extent of Mr. McCain's embrace of Mr. Bush was striking, and Republicans here suggested it reflected two political facts: that he needed to reassure conservatives of his loyalty to Mr. Bush, and that, at this point, he was in a strong enough position in this field to have flexibility in presenting himself.
Mr. McCain went so far as to condemn the collapse of the port deal, saying that Congress had served Mr. Bush poorly by not permitting a 45-day review of security concerns, though he did not mention that the deal was sunk by fellow Republicans.
''The president deserved better,'' Mr. McCain said.
Mr. McCain praised the president for his failed effort to rewrite the Social Security system, said he supported the decision to go into Iraq and blistered at critics who suggested the White House had fabricated evidence of unconventional weapons in Iraq to justify the invasion.
''Anybody who says the president of the United States is lying about weapons of mass destruction is lying,'' Mr. McCain said.
Mr. Romney's criticism of spending in the past four years drew a wave of applause and captured what has been a subject of increasing unhappiness by this White House. But Mr. Romney tempered that implicit criticism by praising Mr. Bush's record on terrorism. ''Thank heavens we have a president who recognizes the extent of this threat,'' he said. ''Thank heavens the president recognizes the greatest ally peace has on this planet is a strong United States.''
By contrast, Mr. Huckabee barely mentioned Mr. Bush in his speech, though he warmly invoked the legacies of Mr. Bush's father and Ronald Reagan.
''George Bush's 1,000 points of light and Ronald Reagan's Morning in America resonate with Americans,'' he said.
For Republicans, the prospect of continuing problems for this White House has implications for their political ambitions in the next two elections and for their hopes of using this period of one-party control to advance the conservative agenda Mr. Bush ran on.
Several speakers warned Republicans in the room to ignore the hoopla in the hotel and to focus on 2006 and not 2008, saying that the party was vulnerable to losses in the House and Senate that could undercut any hope it has to push through major legislative programs.
''We cannot afford big losses this year,'' said Gov. Haley Barbour of Mississippi, a former national Republican chairman, noting that every two-term Republican president since World War II had suffered big Congressional losses in the sixth year of his term.
Mr. McCain, speaking to reporters after his speech Friday night, said, ''We don't have any doubt that we have a great challenge here.''
Some Republicans said the difficulties Mr. Bush faced might be exaggerated or, at the least, repairable. Clarke Reed, a veteran Mississippi Republican leader and the founder of this conference, said the task for Mr. Bush was simple.
''Get focused -- stay focused,'' Mr. Reed said as he watched the procession of Republicans stream by him in the Peabody Hotel. ''I don't think it's that bad. But I think that if the perception is that it's that bad, that is a problem.''
Senator Graham warned that such a Republican mindset could be a recipe for defeat this November. ''It's like we're the party worried about losing,'' he said. ''We need to become the party focused on winning.''
Mr. Huckabee warned against Republicans' turning gloomy. ''Attitude determined altitude,'' he said. ''If we think we're in trouble, we're in trouble. I don't think we are.''
	