When Judge John G. Roberts Jr. appeared before the Senate Judiciary Committee in September for hearings on his nomination to the Supreme Court, all of the participants were largely improvising. It had been 11 years since the last nomination, and the legal landscape, political climate and very state of the world had changed so radically that the old templates were of little use.
Judge Samuel A. Alito Jr., on the other hand, will have a fresh road map from the Roberts hearings when he sits to face the committee Monday for his own confirmation hearings. The topics to be covered, the nature and tenor of the senators' questions, and the limits on what Judge Alito will be willing to answer will almost certainly follow the path cut in September.
But there will be distinct differences, too. Judge Roberts replaced Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, meaning that his nomination was a one-for-one, conservative-for-conservative swap. If Judge Alito is confirmed, he will replace Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, whose vote was often the fulcrum on which the Rehnquist court's decisions turned.
Judge Roberts's judicial record was, moreover, comparatively thin, a product of less than two years as a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Judge Alito, by contrast, has produced hundreds of opinions in his 15 years on the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia. Unlike Judge Roberts, he has written at length on some of the most contentious issues of the day.
Judge Roberts was asked only a few questions about what has since become a burning issue: the scope of executive power. Several senators say they will question Judge Alito closely on the legal implications of the recently disclosed domestic surveillance program.
With the lessons of the Roberts hearings as a guide, then, here is a primer on the questions Judge Alito is likely to face and how he may be expected to answer.
Abortion
Supreme Court confirmation hearings employ a sort of code when it comes to abortion. Since nominees typically refuse to divulge their views about what the Constitution has to say on the subject, on the grounds that the issue may come before them, senators tend to ask instead about privacy and about precedent.
Roe v. Wade, the 1973 case that found a constitutional right to abortion, was largely based on the right to privacy described in a 1965 case, Griswold v. Connecticut. Senators eager to tease out some information about the fate of Roe ask instead about the validity of Griswold.
The Griswold case, which struck down a law making the use of contraceptives illegal, found a constitutional right to privacy in the ''penumbras'' and ''emanations'' of various provisions of the Bill of Rights.
Judge Robert H. Bork's harsh criticism of Griswold in his academic writings and his skepticism about the nature and scope of a constitutional right to privacy at his confirmation hearings helped doom his nomination in 1987.
A second proxy for abortion is precedent. Senator Arlen Specter, the Republican chairman of the Judiciary Committee and a supporter of abortion rights, pressed Judge Roberts, for instance, on whether the Supreme Court's reaffirmation of the core abortion right in a 1992 case, Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, made Roe a ''super-duper precedent.''
Judge Roberts did not adopt Mr. Specter's language and listed several factors on each side of the general question of when precedents should be overruled, many drawn from Casey itself.
Judge Alito may find it harder to take refuge in Casey's discussion of precedent, as the case presents something of a minefield for him. He participated in it as an appeals court judge, dissenting in 1991 from a ruling striking down a Pennsylvania law that required married women to notify their husbands before having an abortion. The Supreme Court disagreed with him in a 5-to-4 ruling the next year.
Though Judge Alito's decision in Casey was careful, technical and reflected an effort to interpret the Supreme Court's confusing abortion jurisprudence at the time, the fact that he found himself on the losing side of the most important abortion case since Roe will doubtless prompt many questions.
So, too, will a statement Mr. Alito made in a 1985 job application for a position in the Justice Department. He said he was proud to have helped advance ''legal positions in which I personally believe very strongly.'' One of those positions, he said, was that ''the Constitution does not protect a right to an abortion.''
While Judge Roberts was one of nine government lawyers who signed a brief urging the Supreme Court to overturn Roe, he said that positions he took as an advocate were not necessarily his own. Judge Alito may find it harder to distance himself, should he wish to, from his Casey dissent and his personal statement in 1985.
Presidential Power
Mr. Specter, in prepared remarks to be presented Monday, said, ''This hearing comes at a time of great national concern about the balance between civil rights and the president's national security authority,'' a reference to the domestic surveillance program. There is, he said, an apparent conflict between ''the president's constitutional war powers as commander in chief to conduct electronic surveillance'' and ''Congressional legislation in the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.''
In September, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the ranking Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, asked Judge Roberts about the scope of presidential power in the context of a 2002 Justice Department legal memorandum concerning harsh interrogations that were arguably forbidden by federal law. The Bush administration had by then disavowed aspects of the memorandum, but Mr. Leahy wanted to know about one of its more abstract assertions.
''Congress can no more interfere,'' the memorandum said, ''with the president's conduct of interrogations of enemy combatants than it can dictate strategic or tactical decisions on the battlefield.'' The Bush administration has made similar arguments in connection with the surveillance program.
Judge Roberts said the framework for analyzing the question of whether the president had exceeded his authority was in a concurring opinion by Justice Robert H. Jackson in a 1952 decision rejecting President Harry S. Truman's assertion that he had the inherent constitutional authority to seize private steel mills as a matter of national security during the Korean War.
''Where the president is acting contrary to Congressional authority,'' Judge Roberts said, ''what Justice Jackson said is, the president's authority is at its lowest ebb.''
It is not clear whether Judge Alito will also endorse Justice Jackson's approach. In a 2001 speech to the Federalist Society, a conservative legal group, Judge Alito spoke in favor of vigorous and expansive executive power. As a government lawyer, too, he frequently argued for a broad interpretation of executive authority.
Congressional Authority
Perhaps no issue engaged the senators questioning Judge Roberts more than a series of recent Supreme Court decisions limiting the ability of Congress to make federal law binding on the states or, sometimes, to legislate on a subject at all.
Judge Alito may expect questions about two of his decisions in this area. In one, a 1996 dissent, he voted to strike down a federal law regulating machine guns, saying Congress had not provided adequate evidence that those weapons facilitated crimes with an effect on interstate commerce.
In a similar vein, Judge Alito took a constrained view of Congressional power in a 2000 case involving the Family and Medical Leave Act. He said the states were immune from lawsuits under the act. The Supreme Court came to the opposite conclusion in a different case in 2003.
Voting Rights
In his 1985 job application, Mr. Alito said that his interest in constitutional law was motivated by disagreement with some decisions of the Warren Court, among them those concerning reapportionment. The decisions, from the 1960's, required states to draw voting districts with equal populations. Some legal scholars at the time contended that the decisions did not have a basis in the Constitution.
Judge Bork, too, was critical of the decisions at his confirmation hearings. ''There is nothing in our history that suggests 'one man one vote' is the only proper way of apportioning,'' he said.
In November, after the disclosure of the 1985 job application, the White House said that Judge Alito now believes that one person one vote is ''bedrock principle.''
COURT IN TRANSITION: THE HEARINGS
	The opinion is more than 50 years old, and it is not even binding precedent. But just minutes into the Supreme Court confirmation hearings of Judge Samuel A. Alito Jr., it took center stage and seemed to lay the groundwork for the questions he will face concerning his views on the limits of presidential power.
The 1952 opinion, a concurrence by Justice Robert H. Jackson, rejected President Harry S. Truman's assertion that he had the constitutional power to seize the nation's steel mills to aid the war effort in Korea. Whether and how Justice Jackson's analysis should apply to broadly similar recent assertions by the Bush administration, notably concerning its domestic surveillance program, will plainly be a central theme when questioning of Judge Alito begins Tuesday morning.
Senator Arlen Specter, the Republican chairman of the Judiciary Committee, discussed only three decisions by name in his opening statement: Justice Jackson's concurrence in the 1952 case, Youngstown Sheet and Tube Company v. Sawyer, and two abortion cases, Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey.
Quoting from the Jackson concurrence and referring to the surveillance program, Mr. Specter said, ''What is at stake is the equilibrium established by our constitutional system.''
Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the ranking Democrat on the committee, made a similar assertion in noting that Judge Alito would replace Justice Sandra Day O'Connor if he was confirmed. ''She upheld,'' Mr. Leahy said, ''the fundamental principle of judicial review over the exercise of government power.''
That was a reference to Justice O'Connor's decisive opinion turning back another broad assertion of executive power in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, a 2004 case in which the court allowed a man held without charges as an enemy combatant to challenge his detention, over the objections of the Bush administration.
''We have long since made clear that a state of war is not a blank check for the president when it comes to the rights of the nation's citizens,'' Justice O'Connor wrote for herself and three other justices in 2004. She cited one case as precedent for that proposition: Youngstown.
Judge Alito, in his brief, mostly biographical opening statement, did not address Youngstown or any other case. But he did seem to nod in the direction of the current controversy. ''No person in this country, no matter how high or powerful, is above the law,'' he said, ''and no person in this country is beneath the law.''
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., at his confirmation hearings in September, endorsed Justice Jackson's concurrence. It has, Judge Roberts said, ''set the framework for consideration of questions of executive power in times of war and with respect to foreign affairs since it was decided.''
Most of the discussion of executive power on Monday came from Democratic senators. One Republican, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, argued for an aggressive view of executive power.
''In a time of war,'' Mr. Graham said, ''I want the executive branch to have the tools to protect me, my family and my country.''
In 1952, the Supreme Court faced a set of clashing interests in the Youngstown case broadly similar to those in the current surveillance controversy. That April, President Truman seized the nation's steel mills to prevent an expected labor strike, saying that national security during the Korean War required uninterrupted access to steel.
In June 1952, in a 6-to-3 decision, the Supreme Court rejected the various legal rationales offered by the Truman administration for the seizures. Many of those rationales have echoes in the justifications offered by the Bush administration for its detention of enemy combatants, harsh interrogations and domestic surveillance without court approval.
Writing for the court, Justice Hugo L. Black said the president's power was extensive but not unlimited.
''Even though 'theater of war' be an expanding concept,'' Justice Black wrote, ''we cannot with faithfulness to our constitutional system hold that the commander in chief of the armed forces has the ultimate power as such to take possession of private property in order to keep labor disputes from stopping production. This is a job for the nation's lawmakers, not for its military authorities.''
There are, of course, obvious differences between the Youngstown case and recent efforts to combat terrorism. The seizure of the steel mills, for instance, was a wholly domestic matter. The surveillance program, by contrast, monitors international communications between the United States and other nations. The Korean War was, moreover, a conventional one, while terrorism involves a more amorphous threat.
It is not entirely clear why Justice Jackson's concurrence has had such a lasting impact. It may be because he spoke with particular authority, having argued for expansive executive power as President Franklin D. Roosevelt's attorney general, much as Judge Alito did when he was a lawyer in the Reagan administration.
''That comprehensive and undefined presidential powers hold both practical advantages and grave dangers for the country,'' Justice Jackson wrote in the concurrence, ''will impress anyone who has served as legal adviser to a president in time of transition and public anxiety.''
He proposed three categories to judge the constitutionality of assertions of executive power. His framework may be thought to endorse or reject the Bush administration's position, depending on how various Congressional actions are understood.
The president's authority is at its maximum, Justice Jackson wrote, when he ''acts pursuant to an express or implied authorization of Congress.'' The administration says a resolution authorizing the president to use military force after the Sept. 11 attacks was such authorization.
In his opening statement, Mr. Graham said he was troubled by that argument. ''I've got some problems,'' he said, ''with using a force resolution to the point that future presidents may not be able to get a force resolution from Congress if you interpret it too broadly.''
Justice Jackson's second category was ''a zone of twilight'' in which Congress has taken no action. In that case, he said, ''any actual test of power is likely to depend on the imperatives of events and contemporary imponderables rather than on abstract theories of law.''
The third category is where the president takes action at odds with the will of Congress. A 1978 law, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, appears to require court approval before monitoring of the sort the administration has acknowledged.
In this third area, Justice Jackson said, the president's power is ''at its lowest ebb,'' and claims of presidential authority ''must be scrutinized with caution.''
COURT IN TRANSITION: LEGAL CONTEXT
	Washington State may not deny former prisoners the right to vote simply because they are too poor to pay outstanding court costs, a state judge in Seattle ruled on Monday.
''There is simply no rational relationship between the ability to pay and the exercise of constitutional rights,'' the judge, Michael S. Spearman of King County Superior Court, wrote.
The decision could affect tens of thousands of people, according to the American Civil Liberties Union of Washington. The group brought suit to challenge a Washington law that restored the voting rights of people convicted of felonies only after they had served their time and completed all other ''requirements of the sentence, including any and all legal financial obligations.''
The A.C.L.U. sued on behalf of three former prisoners who were paying off fees and fines, with court approval, at the rate of $10 or $20 a month. ''It will likely take years before each plaintiff will be able to complete the payments,'' Judge Spearman determined.
Indeed, one plaintiff, Beverly Dubois, a 49-year-old former park ranger, found her debt growing over time. Ms. Dubois had spent nine months in jail for growing and selling marijuana. She still owes the state almost $1,900 for court costs, a county ''drug enforcement fund'' and a ''victim assessment fee.'' Though Ms. Dubois pays the state $10 a month, her debt has increased over time because of the 12 percent interest she is charged.
Fees of the sort imposed on Ms. Dubois are becoming increasingly common, legal experts said. But Washington appears to have been alone in denying the right to vote to former prisoners solely on financial grounds. Courts have generally upheld the outright denial of the right to vote to people who have been convicted of felonies.
Judge Spearman ruled that the Washington law was a violation of the equal protection provisions of the federal and state constitutions. He rejected the state's argument that all former prisoners were treated equally in that they were all required to complete the terms of their sentences, including the financial ones, before they were allowed to vote.
The correct question, Judge Spearman wrote, is whether there is a rational justification for granting the right to vote to felons who can pay their financial obligations immediately but not to those who must pay them over time. Because the state could offer no good reason for the distinction, he wrote, it amounted to impermissible discrimination on the basis of wealth.
''There is no logic in the assumption that a person in possession of sufficient resources to pay the obligation immediately is the more law-abiding citizen,'' Judge Spearman wrote. ''Indeed, the better example of respect for our justice system may very well be the indigent who manages for years to make monthly payments toward the obligation.''
State officials said they had not decided whether to appeal.
Doug Honig, a spokesman for the A.C.L.U., said Judge Spearman's decision vindicated a core right.
''It reaffirms a important principle in our democratic system,'' Mr. Honig said. ''Being poor should not stop you from being able to vote.''
	