IT'S little surprise that vacation packages are the hottest sellers for online agencies like Expedia, Orbitz and Travelocity. By booking flights and hotels together, after all, travelers can save themselves both some clicks and cash.
But now technology is making it easier for individual airlines and hotels to sell packages themselves on the Internet, offering consumers a wider array of choices than in years past and presenting still more evidence of the escalating online competition between travel companies and agents.
In recent months, JetBlue.com rolled out its first vacation package service, Marriott.com upgraded its vacations, and American Airlines added last-minute vacations to its mix of packages. Since airline sites will offer no choice in carriers, and hotel sites will likewise exclude all but their own properties, many travelers may think twice before approaching these sites when online agencies offer much more choice.
For many reasons, though, it's worth the effort. Start with the obvious: travelers who favor a particular hotel or airline will want to check its Web site, either out of allegiance or to fatten their loyalty accounts.
JetBlue fans, for instance, could literally find nothing in the way of packages until November, when the company started JetBlue Getaways on its site. (The vacations are also available via a toll-free number, 800-538-2583.)
The company chose not to rely on wholesalers or other travel agents to team its airplane seats with hoteliers because it wanted to build direct relationships with hotels, said Rusty McNeal, JetBlue's director of vacation planning. Mr. McNeal said the company expected to be able to offer better deals with hotels throughout the year because JetBlue had committed itself to these properties, ''rather than just coming in during the high season and forgetting about promotions in the low season or certain times of the week.''
One example of how such a direct relationship can bear fruit, Mr. McNeal said, is in how JetBlue.com is marketing the Monte Carlo Resort and Casino in Las Vegas, a four-star property. In December, the site was offering round-trip air fare from J.F.K. to Las Vegas and two weekend nights at the hotel for $365 a person. (Weekend hotel rates range from $100 to $400 a night.)
''We're not always promoting the lowest-price hotel, which also makes us a little different from others,'' Mr. McNeal said. ''Most of ours are four- and five-star hotels, '' which, he added, are properties more in line with the tastes of his company's customers.
Others on the site include the Luxor in Las Vegas and the British Colonial Hilton in Nassau.
Indeed, other packages offered online typically feature hotels with lesser ratings to cater to those who might be traveling on a tighter budget. For example, United.com featured the Homestead Studios Suites, a one-star hotel in Salt Lake City, while Travelocity featured the Day's Inn in Springville, Utah, near Provo.
Members of the TrueBlue loyalty program of JetBlue can also earn points if they book the vacation on the company's Web site, just as members of loyalty programs at Northwest, American and Marriott do when they book packages on those companies' sites.
Henry H. Harteveldt, a travel analyst with Forrester Research, said, ''Airlines and hotels want to do as little vacation business as possible through online travel agencies because of the costs involved, and also customer control.''
When customers book through agency sites, not only must airlines and hotels pay a commission, but consumers can also easily stray to other airlines and hotels, even if they had an allegiance to a particular company. Not only can travel companies avoid paying agency fees by selling vacations directly to consumers, Mr. Harteveldt said, but they can also establish relationships with their customers and keep them coming back to their sites.
For these reasons, hotels and airlines have become more aggressive in recent years about attracting customers directly to their sites. In the last year in particular, hotels and airlines have pushed harder to attract customers with many hotels guaranteeing that no other sites will sell their rooms for less.
Of course, that customer-company loyalty goes only so far. While airline and hotel companies are often happy to award points for vacation bookings on their own Web sites, they generally stop short of allowing members of their loyalty programs to pay for the vacations with points.
American Airlines is one exception. Recently, it offered a seven-night stay for two in late January at the Cliff Lodge and Spa in Snowbird, Utah, for $2,632, including round-trip air fare from New York to Salt Lake City. The price for the lodging alone on Snowbird.com, the resort's Web site, would have been $2,330, while the price for the flight on American's Web site would have been $577. The total saving with the package was $275.
Moreover, American's AAdvantage members could spend 257,000 points on the vacation and knock the price down to $576. (Those who book through American's Last Minute Packages section cannot pay with points.)
Analysts and industry executives say customers have a wider range of options than they did in years past, when airlines and hotels were more likely to offer a more static selection of vacation deals. With the advent of more sophisticated booking technology, airlines and hotels can plug into a deep inventory of seats and rooms to create packages dynamically.
Paradoxically, though, the biggest online agencies often sell that service to airlines and hotels. Take Cendant, which owns Orbitz and CheapTickets.com, among other companies. Cendant's Neat Group creates packages for the sites of SpiritAir, Marriott, Frontier and half of United's vacation package products (its Escapes brand).
That can have significant implications for travelers. Mitch Truwit, chief executive of Cendant's Orbitz and CheapTickets divisions, said that while all the company's competitors ''have solid offerings'' in packages, Cendant has sought to build a stronger international inventory of hotel rooms. As a result, hotels that rely on Cendant's Neat Group to create packages for their sites could miss some bargains that Orbitz would offer, simply because the hotel site would present only its own properties.
For instance, for a vacation to Salt Lake City, Orbitz offered a package including air fare and a stay at the Holiday Inn Express for $992, while Marriott's best deal was $1,145, with a room at the Courtyard by Marriott in Salt Lake City.
As Mr. Harteveldt of Forrester said: ''This isn't as easy as buying an airline ticket from Point A to Point B. There could be subtle factors involved, such as the category of hotel room you're getting in the package. The hard thing about this is, you have to look beyond the price to really understand what you're getting.''
CLICKING TO FIND SAVINGS ON A UTAH SKI VACATION  One ski vacation for two, please, from New York City to Salt Lake City from Jan. 22 to 29, with round-trip air fare and hotel.
American Airlines (AA.com)
Deal: Air fare and seven nights at the Cliff Lodge and Spa in Snowbird, Utah, for $2,632. Saving off the flight and hotel booked separately: $275.
Pros: Convenient location and flights.
Cons: Flights depart from and arrive at different New York airports. Also, American's Web site often forces users into wasted clicks.
JetBlue (JetBlue.com)
Deal: Air fare and seven nights at the Cliff Lodge and Spa for $2,610. Saving off flight and hotel booked separately: $190.
Pros: Convenient hotel location, easy Web site experience.
Cons: The return flight was a red-eye.
United Airlines Escapes (United.com)
Deal: Air fare and seven nights at La Quinta Inn in Salt Lake City for $898. Saving off flight and hotel booked separately: $310.
Pros: Easy Web site navigation, low price.
Cons: The hotels listed were farther from ski areas than those in other packages.
United Airlines Vacations (United.com)
Deal: Air fare and seven nights at the Homestead Studios Suites in Salt Lake City, for $845. Saving off flight and hotel booked separately: $204.
Pros: Low price.
Cons: One-star hotel. United Vacations offers a less user-friendly online experience than United Escapes.
Marriott (Marriott.com)
Deal: Air fare on Northwest and seven nights at the Courtyard by Marriott Salt Lake City Airport, for $1,145. Saving off flight and room booked separately: $121.
Pros: Good price at midtier hotel.
Cons: Frustrating search system on the Web site.
Starwood (SPGVacations.com)
Deal: There were no packages in Salt Lake City, even though the site allows you to book flights separately to more than 60 airports and Starwood.com showed vacancies for the dates sought (at Sheraton City Center Hotel).
Travelocity.com
Deal: Air fare on Delta and seven nights at a Days Inn in Springville, Utah, for $821. Saving off flight and room booked on suppliers' sites: $20.
Pros: Inexpensive trip.
Cons: Lower-tier hotel away from ski resorts and Salt Lake City.
Expedia.com
Deal: Air fare on Northwest and seven nights at Red Lion Hotel Salt Lake Downtown for $1,324. Savings off flight and room booked on suppliers' sites: $72. (If booked separately on Expedia.com, $102.)
Pros: Good midtier hotel.
Cons: Little saved off à la carte price. Vacation package customers are not informed until later in the purchase process whether their purchase will result in frequent flier miles.
Orbitz.com
Deal: Air fare on Delta and seven nights at the Holiday Inn Express Salt Lake City for $992. Savings off flight and room booked on suppliers' sites: $39.
Pros: Good location.
Cons: Little in savings.
BOB TEDESCHI
PRACTICAL TRAVELER: BOOKING ON THE WEB
	FEELING depressed because you missed out on Google's stock bonanza? Not to worry. Just get on the company's shadow payroll.
Hundreds of thousands of people have essentially done just that by starting blogs, forums or other informational sites and getting paid for posting ads on Google's behalf. And while the money they earn might not be enough for them to buy, say, a share of Google's stock, such revenues are growing.
The trickle-down effect from Google does not stop at fledgling entrepreneurs. A growing number of rank-and-file contributors to Web sites are also profiting. Consider Digital Point Solutions, a software company in San Diego, which publishes an online forum (http://forums.digitalpoint.com) frequented by about 15,000 users. Any one of them who starts a new forum discussion topic receives half of the advertising revenue paid to the site by Google for ads on the front page of that topic section. (The discussion's creator then splits his share with others who post messages.)
Google does not actually advertise on the Digital Point site. Rather, through Google's AdSense program, it places ads on the forum, similar to the ads that appear next to search results on Google.com. Google scans the information on the forum's pages, then posts related ads. If the discussion is about computer hardware, for instance, ads for DVD drives might appear.
Google pays Digital Point about $10,000 a month, depending on how many people view or click on those ads, said Shawn D. Hogan, the owner and chief technology officer of Digital Point.
Mr. Hogan said he started the revenue-sharing approach in 2004 ''as kind of a marketing gimmick.''
''But everyone seemed to think it was a cool idea,'' he said. ''I saw a lot of other sites doing the same thing maybe six months later.''
Mr. Hogan said it was difficult to say whether the financial incentives had made the forum's participants more active, because its growth rate was about the same before and after it started paying users. Either way, the payoff is meager. ''In the best-case scenario, someone might make $50 a month, so they're definitely not quitting their jobs to do this,'' he said. ''But it might be enough to buy a nice dinner.''
One area of concern, Mr. Hogan said, was whether the forum's participants would skew their postings to earn more money. For instance, since advertisers in certain categories, like sexual-performance drugs, pay much more to place their ads on Google and its affiliated sites, you might expect technology discussions to randomly veer in that direction.
''But that hasn't happened, thankfully,'' Mr. Hogan said. ''Probably because there isn't that much revenue in it for them.''
That could change, as more marketers adopt this approach, which Yahoo also offers. Google's advertising network sales, which come largely from its AdSense advertisers, reached $675 million in the third quarter of 2005, the last period for which Google reported results. That figure was up 76 percent from a year earlier. AdSense generates slightly less revenue than Google's primary revenue engine, its search Web sites, which sold about $885 million worth of ads in the third quarter of 2005, a 115 percent jump from the previous year.
Google.com and the company's foreign search sites contribute more to Google's bottom line than AdSense, because for every dollar the company brings in through AdSense and other places that distribute its ads, it pays roughly 78.5 cents back to sites like Digital Point that display the ads.
But in some ways, search advertising has a more limited horizon, since the number of advertisements a company can display is limited by the number of searches its users conduct. Internet users continue to increase their reliance on search sites, and Google in particular, but the rate of growth is in the single digits.
By contrast, millions of small sites have not yet signed up for Google's AdSense program, which was introduced in 2002. AdSense quickly gained a following among bigger companies with an online presence, like the Weather Channel, as a way to supplement their advertising deals and populate more obscure pages with paid ads. But as more small sites use the Internet to post photos, journals and other material, the number of pages that can carry new Google ads is growing quickly.
That's what makes AdSense one of Google's most compelling long-term bets, said Charlene Li, an online media analyst with Forrester Research. ''I've called Google the one-trick pony for a long time, and for the most part they still are,'' Ms. Li said. ''But they really see AdSense as the next frontier.''
To that end, the company has refined the program significantly, with various features intended to attract more advertisers and publishers. For instance, as of late last year anyone who created a blog with Google's Blogger service was automatically enrolled in the AdSense program.
''Before that, it was quite painful to figure out,'' said Gokul Rajaram, the business product manager for AdSense, ''so over the last few months we've seen a sharp uptick in bloggers using AdSense.''
For AdSense advertisers, some of the more significant improvements began last June, when Google started allowing marketers to select vast groups of sites on which to advertise, as Paramount Pictures did last year when it chose 100 small sites with hip-hop-oriented content to promote its movie ''Hustle & Flow.''
Late last year, Google also gave advertisers the ability to display graphical ads on sites within the AdSense network of publishers, as well as the ability to pay different (typically lower) prices for AdSense ads than those available on Google.com. The company will not disclose how many advertisers have joined the program -- ''thousands'' is all it says -- but analysts said marketers were quickly warming to it, thanks in part to the recent upgrades.
More advertisers, of course, mean more money for publishers, many of whom would simply not publish if it were not for AdSense, Ms. Li of Forrester said. ''Before, if I wanted to put advertising on my site, I'd have to hire ad salespeople, process orders -- there's no way,'' she said. ''This has taken away a huge barrier in publishing and made it viable for people to make a couple dollars, or thousands of dollars.''
E-COMMERCE REPORT
	CRAIGSLIST has taken on many giants. Can it survive a challenge from Microsoft?
The software behemoth late last month started Windows Live Expo (expo.live.com), another node in its growing network of Internet services, and a direct stab at Craiglist's vital organs: free, local classified ads.
In doing so, Microsoft is treading on ground that has swallowed many other companies, and one that Google has also recently begun to explore. But Microsoft is taking a more comprehensive approach than others, using its instant messaging, mapping and blogging services to help people sell items among groups of local friends and acquaintances.
Craigslist has no such weapons in its arsenal, but it is expanding quickly from its San Francisco base into new markets, making it harder for competitors to generate enough classified listings to attract an audience. Whether it is establishing a defensible position quickly enough, though, is an open question.
''It's going to be tough for anyone to compete with Craigslist in the Bay area,'' said Charlene Li, an analyst with Forrester Research. ''But I think it's still wide open in many other places.''
At first glance, Expo looks like countless other Craigslist pretenders, with a list of categories on the home page, which users can localize by ZIP code or city. Users may also search for specific items. When users post new listings, they are asked to tag their listing by ZIP code, and they may also include their exact address for advertising garage sales or for listing real estate for sale or rent. Then, when prospective customers click on the ad, they can see a satellite image of the home.
More important, perhaps, is the feature that allows Expo users to choose to view only listings from people in their MSN Messenger contact list or personal e-mail groups. MSN Messenger users will see a pulsating star next to the name of anyone on their list who has recently placed a new item for sale on Expo or made a new posting on MSN Spaces, Microsoft's popular blogging service.
With 205 million people signed up as Messenger users, and another 40 million users of MSN Spaces (and 100 million Spaces visitors in the last 16 months), the company already has a strong network of potential classifieds customers, said Garry Wiseman, Microsoft's product unit manager for Windows Live Expo.
''I've seen some sites attempt to create these kinds of services, but they have to build it up, which takes forever,'' Mr. Wiseman said. ''We already had this massive network.''
Mr. Wiseman said Microsoft would not charge for classified listings in the short term, but might charge businesses to post job or auto listings, as Craigslist does. He also said Microsoft was exploring a way to distribute the ads in print publications owned by other companies, and share in the revenue.
Ms. Li, the Forrester analyst, said Microsoft was wise to use the array of services within Windows Live to help users sell goods and services more easily. ''It's a fantastic idea,'' she said. ''People love eBay so much because it's about community. Expo has the potential to have it, whereas classifieds don't have that soul.''
Fans of Craigslist -- many of whom bare their most intimate thoughts on the site's discussion boards -- would disagree, and perhaps reel at the notion of Microsoft having more soul than their beloved, humble servant of a Web site, with its staff of 19.
Whatever the label, Microsoft may find that the wheels of commerce will roll more even quickly among people who are more closely connected than the like-minded strangers who congregate on Craigslist.
Of course, Microsoft's idea has been tried before, back when Friendster was the future star du jour. Tribe.net, a social networking site, received backing from three major newspaper chains in 2003 on the logic that it might help them win back some of the classified advertising revenue that has migrated online in recent years.
But social networking sites have so far failed to generate nearly as many classified advertising listings as Craigslist, analysts said, partly because users have seen those sites more as places to hook up for romance or friendship than for local commerce -- an area Craigslist has increasingly ruled in the last year.
Just as eBay has built a sizable lead against competing services because it has exponentially more merchandise to offer, so too has Craigslist become a go-to site for anyone looking for housing and other products and services in markets like San Francisco and New York. Likewise, sellers now flock to the site in those markets because that's where the buyers are.
According to comScore Networks, an online consultant, 8.5 million people visited a Craigslist Web site in February, up from 3.7 million a year earlier. The closest competitor was the Trader Publishing Company, a Norfolk, Va.-based publisher of classified ad magazines and Web sites largely devoted to certain categories of goods, like boats, automobiles and luxury homes. Tribe, meanwhile, attracted 740,000 users. The stakes are high for the category winner. Forrester predicts that online classifieds will generate $3.1 billion in sales this year -- a 17 percent jump from last year -- and will reach $4.7 billion by 2010. Newspaper classifieds, by contrast, will reach about $15 billion, up just 5 percent from last year.
Craigslist, which is privately held, does not disclose revenue. Its growth has come from its expansion into new locations -- as of last week, it had 205 sites covering cities in every state, as well as cities in 35 foreign nations.
Jim Buckmaster, the chief executive of Craigslist, said the company was concentrating more on starting multilingual sites than other features or services.
''We can't match them resource for resource, even if we were so inclined,'' Mr. Buckmaster said of his competitors. ''But we don't try to match them in technology bells and whistles, since that's not the kind of thing our users request.''
Craigslist has, Mr. Buckmaster said, sustained its growth rate despite Google's recent introduction of Base, which many people have used to post classified ads (Base's numbers, which Google would not disclose, are still small enough not to register on commonly used Internet statistics), and the introduction in foreign cities of classified sites by eBay's Kijiji unit. (Ebay own a 25 percent stake in Craigslist). ''The need for this kind of service is so vast that many companies can address it together,'' he said. ''I don't think it has to be a zero sum game.''
Still, Mr. Buckmaster suggests he could be wrong.
''Now at least we'll get to see whether our philosophy and way of running things is as important as we think it is,'' he said. ''Who knows? Maybe incremental technological bells and whistles mean a lot. But the experiment has begun.''
E-COMMERCE REPORT
	