From Arizona to Pennsylvania, from Colorado to Connecticut, Democratic candidates for Congress are reading from a stack of different scripts these days.
At the Capitol in Hartford the other morning, State Senator Christopher Murphy denounced the ''disastrous prescription drug benefit bill'' embraced by his Republican opponent, Representative Nancy L. Johnson.
Jeff Latas, a Democratic candidate in an Arizona race, is talking about the nation's dangerous reliance on oil imports from the Middle East. Ed Perlmutter, a Colorado Democrat, says he is running against ''the arrogance and cronyism'' displayed by Washington Republicans.
And in New Mexico, Patricia Madrid, the state attorney general, is urging the United States to set a timetable for quitting Iraq.
''We have a lot to run on,'' said Ms. Madrid, who is trying to unseat Representative Heather A. Wilson.
These scattershot messages reflect what officials in both parties say are vulnerabilities among Republicans on Capitol Hill, as well as President Bush's weakened political condition in this election year.
But they also reflect splits within the party about what it means to be a Democrat -- and what a winning Democratic formula will be -- after years in which conservative ideas have dominated the national policy debate and helped win elections.
And they complicate the basic strategy being pursued by Democratic leaders in Washington to capture control of Congress: to turn this election into a national referendum on the party in power, much the way Republicans did against Democrats in 1994.
Interviews with Democratic challengers in contested districts suggest that the party is far from settling on an overarching theme that will work as well in central Connecticut as it does in central Colorado.
And while Democrats have no shortage of criticism to offer, they have so far not introduced a strategy for governing along the lines of the Republican Party's Contract With America, the 1994 initiative that some Democrats hold up as their model for this year's elections.
''It's certainly worth the effort, but it's damned hard to do,'' Charles O. Jones, a professor emeritus of political science at the University of Wisconsin in Madison, said of the Democratic effort to emulate the Republicans.
''If you're going to run a national campaign,'' as the Republicans did in 1994, Dr. Jones said, ''it's helpful to have a message, not just 'The other guys don't know what they are doing.' If Democrats are using that strategy, I haven't heard that message yet.''
Republican leaders, while acknowledging concern about the political environment for their party, said Democrats were paying a price for being out of power and failing to propose their own program of ideas. Representative Thomas M. Reynolds of New York, the head of the National Republican Congressional Committee, said Democrats were throwing things ''against the wall to see what will stick.''
The Democrats' struggle to turn 435 Congressional races into a national election, analysts and party officials said, is critical to their hopes of capturing the 15 Republican seats they need to win back control of the House.
From the perspective of the country's mood, Democrats could hardly ask for a more hospitable environment, analysts said. There is strong discontent among voters with the way Mr. Bush and the Republican-controlled Congress have led the country. Corruption investigations have implicated Republican members of Congress. There is anxiety over the war in Iraq and distress among retirees over the new Medicare prescription drug program.
But Democratic ambitions have run up against a diminished political playing field, narrowed by states' partisan redistricting efforts that have put the vast majority of Congressional seats out of play.
Of 435 House seats, just 32 are in races considered competitive, compared with 110 at this time in 1994, according to the nonpartisan Cook Political Report. Of those, 11 are held by Democrats and 21 by Republicans.
Unless the political environment changes to make more Republican seats vulnerable, or more Republican incumbents retire before November, Democrats will have to hold on to all 11 of their competitive seats and win 15 of the 21 Republican seats in order to take back the House. (Representative Bernard Sanders of Vermont is considered a Democrat, even though he officially lists himself as an Independent.)
More Republican retirements are certainly possible, including those of Representatives Bill Thomas of California and Sherwood L. Boehlert of New York, both senior members running up against their term limits as committee chairmen.
Representative Rahm Emanuel, Democrat of Illinois and head of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, said that Congressional elections had regularly turned on national issues over the past century, typically reflecting weariness with the party in power. Still, Mr. Emanuel said, his strategy is to no small extent born of necessity.
The Republicans ''gerrymandered this map,'' he said in an interview while campaigning for Mr. Murphy in Connecticut. ''You can't beat a gerrymandered map with the one-offs: a trick here and a trick there. You have got to nationalize it -- create something bigger than the map they've drawn.''
Representative Reynolds of New York said the Democratic strategy would fail, because Congressional elections are determined by local dynamics: voters, he said, are more likely to make decisions based on what their member of Congress has delivered for the district than on what happens in Washington.
''Anything is possible,'' Mr. Reynolds said. ''I mean, it's possible we're going to elect a Republican governor of New York. But is it likely? I'd say no,'' he said, reflecting widespread Republican pessimism about the party's strengths in his home state.
''Congress's approval rating is a little flat,'' he added. ''My self-esteem wants to see it a little higher. But it is what it is. The most important thing is people love their congressman, no matter what.''
In Iowa, Jeff Lamberti, the Republican co-president of the State Senate, who is challenging Representative Leonard L. Boswell, a Democrat, said: ''I'm not particularly concerned that the Third Congressional seat will be determined by some kind of nationalization of the election. The people of Iowa are going to make their decision based on who the candidates are on the ballot, how hard you work and how you connect with them.''
Of all the differences between now and 1994, perhaps most notable is that 12 years ago, 69 seats held by Democrats were up for grabs at this stage of the election cycle, compared with 21 Republican seats today.
But Amy Walter, an analyst for the Cook Political Report, said that as many as 25 additional Republican seats could become competitive by November. In most of those districts, Ms. Walter said, Democrats have good candidates in place.
Philip A. Klinkner, an associate professor of political science at Hamilton College in New York, said conditions were historically right for the Congressional election to turn on national issues.
''You tend to see it at times when you have really unpopular presidents or really popular presidents,'' Dr. Klinkner said.
As they try to encourage this development, Democrats have experimented with several themes: corruption in Washington, Medicare, a Republican Congress acting as a rubber stamp for the president, governmental incompetence and what Mr. Emanuel, borrowing a phrase from his former boss at the White House, President Bill Clinton, described as a choice between ''change and more of the same.''
The Democrats' effort would appear, at least from conversations with Democratic candidates, to be something of a work in progress. In Hartford, Mr. Murphy denounced restriction on stem cell research. In Indiana, Brad Ellsworth, the Vanderburgh County sheriff, criticized Representative John Hostettler, a Republican, for his vote against the Hurricane Katrina aid package.
State Senator Ron Klein of Florida, a Democratic challenger to Representative E. Clay Shaw Jr., a Republican, said, ''Medicare is the big issue in this area because we have so many seniors.''
Democrats pointed out that Republicans did not offer their Contract With America until the final weeks of the 1994 campaign and said that they were planning to offer their own version by summer.
Still, party officials said, it has been difficult to build a consensus. Some Democrats want to call for raising automobile mileage standards to conserve energy, but Democrats in Michigan have resisted that idea. While Democrats including Ms. Madrid of New Mexico want to set a timetable for pulling out of Iraq, others say that would be politically and militarily disastrous.
Mr. Emanuel, though, said he was not worried. ''What divide?'' he said.
''We agree on Social Security,'' he continued. ''We also agree on the war, which is, not more of the same.''
''Skelton has a position. Murtha has a position. Levin has a position,'' he said of Congressional Democrats who have raised questions about the war. ''But all of them have one thing in common: Staying the course is a fool's errand. O.K.? I'm happy that our party has a lot of different ideas about how to solve a problem.''
Correction:  March 8, 2006, Wednesday  A chart on Monday about closely contested Congressional races reversed the maps for the eighth and ninth districts of Indiana. The eighth district is in the west, the ninth in the southeast.
	As many as four big states -- California, Florida, Illinois and New Jersey -- are likely to move up their 2008 presidential primaries to early next February, further upending an already unsettled nominating process and forcing candidates of both parties to rethink their campaign strategies, party officials said Wednesday.
The changes, which seem all but certain to be enacted by state legislatures, mean that the presidential candidates face the prospect of going immediately from an ordered series of early contests in relatively small states in January to a single-day, coast-to-coast battlefield in February, encompassing some of the most expensive advertising markets in the nation.
The changes would appear to benefit well-financed and already familiar candidates and diminish the prospects of those with less money and name recognition going into such a highly compressed series of contests early next year.
Associates of Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, the New York Democrat, and Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican, said that should either of them stumble early on, the respective party primaries in California and New Jersey -- two states that would seem particularly hospitable to them -- could offer an expensive but welcome firewall.
But at the same time, states like New Jersey and California could provide an opening for Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, who faces the daunting prospect of overcoming resistance among social conservatives in the Republican contests in Iowa and South Carolina in January.
And several party analysts suggested that having such delegate-rich states at stake on Feb. 5 could persuade candidates who might otherwise step out after a defeat in Iowa or New Hampshire to press on in hopes of a dramatic recovery on the new Super Tuesday.
''I think this is huge,'' said John Weaver, a senior adviser to Mr. McCain. ''And the unintended consequences could be even bigger.''
While officials in both parties are wary of the changes, final say over the calendar rests with the states. Advisers to Republican and Democratic presidential candidates say they have come to view substantial changes as inevitable and they have begun to plan accordingly.
''We don't set the calendar, and we don't control the calendar, but we are going to compete aggressively in all these states,'' said Patti Solis Doyle, who is the manager of Mrs. Clinton's exploratory presidential effort. ''And I will also tell you we have the resources and the organization to compete in all those states.''
The developments mark the latest upheaval in a political calendar already in disarray. The Democratic Party voted last year to allow Nevada and South Carolina to move their nominating contests into the narrow period at the beginning of the process that once was confined to just Iowa's caucus and New Hampshire's primary.
But New Hampshire officials, protective of their first-in-the-nation primary status, have responded by saying they will schedule their primary as early as it takes, even before Jan. 1, to protect its traditional role. And no one seems to know where the scramble for influence among the states will end.
''This is completely out of control,'' said William F. Galvin, the Massachusetts secretary of state. He is the leader of a National Association of Secretaries of State committee that is monitoring this movement and trying to push back against it.
''The issue has been bad,'' Mr. Galvin said. ''But it's never been as bad as it has been this year. In New Hampshire, they are going to be singing Christmas carols and voting.''
The developments suggest that the national parties are losing any control they have had over the calendar by which they will nominate presidential candidates in 2008. California, New Jersey, Florida and Illinois are most likely to move their primaries early, probably to Feb. 5, joining at least five smaller states that had already scheduled primaries for that day. Illinois lawmakers are talking about moving their primary to help Senator Barack Obama, a Democratic contender; if history is any guide, it is possible that the other candidates might decline to compete in the home state of one of their rivals.
But final votes have not been taken, and state officials said it was possible they could end up going even earlier. Florida in particular has talked about holding its primary seven days after New Hampshire's, at the risk of sanctions from the Democratic National Committee. And officials said that other states, viewing this surge to the front of the pack, could join in as well.
The Democratic National Committee had adopted a new calendar last year, reducing the once dominant influence of Iowa and New Hampshire, after years of consideration. The Republican Party has so far deferred to Democrats on the changes, waiting to see the outcome of the back-and-forth.
Democrats and Republicans said that the changes would be the latest step in the evolution of a presidential nominating system that increasingly seems resistant to the kind of dark-horse presidential bid that was possible back when small states like Iowa and New Hampshire enjoyed such influence over the nominating process.
It has sowed unease and confusion among campaign staff members as they have tried to measure its implications, and has prompted them to begin making moves now to prepare for a whole different nominating system. While conventional wisdom is that the best-known candidates would benefit, views about how the shift might play out vary among strategists.
Tad Devine, a Democratic consultant who was a senior adviser to Democratic presidential candidates in 2004 and 2000, said the calendar changes, combined with the presence on the Democratic side of three strong and well-financed candidates -- Mr. Obama, Mrs. Clinton and, probably, John Edwards, the former North Carolina senator -- could mean that the battle for the nomination drags on for months.
''I think there's a very good chance that we are going to be sitting here at the end of next March saying, 'How are people going to put together a majority of delegates with 80 percent of the delegates gone?' '' he said. ''The nominating process in 2008 is not a little different. It's fundamentally different.''
And the campaigns are adjusting accordingly.  Mr. McCain recently hired Steve Schmidt, a former Bush campaign operative who managed the re-election bid of Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, the California Republican, in no small part because of what he saw as Mr. Schmidt's command of California politics.
Similarly, Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, has turned his attention to Florida, where he sees a strong prospect of knocking out Mr. McCain by appealing to social conservatives, and installed a campaign team that includes two top political advisers to former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida. He is about to announce the hiring of more than six top aides in Florida.
Last weekend, Mr. Romney went to New Jersey, where his aides also think he could make a strong appeal.
''The focus of our efforts publicly have been in Iowa, South Carolina, Michigan, New Hampshire,'' said Kevin Madden, Mr. Romney's press secretary. ''But we are very well organized in Florida.''
In the case of Florida, Democrats and Republicans have welcomed the prospect of having to spend heavily on an early primary because that could prove an early investment for the general campaign, as well, considering how competitive that state is. That is not the case in California or New Jersey, two expensive states that have been solidly Democratic in recent presidential races.
And some Democrats disputed the notion that a California victory could help someone recover from a poor showing in the early states. Nick Baldick, a senior adviser to Mr. Edwards, noted that Howard Dean spent heavily in states that held their primaries after New Hampshire and Iowa and never recovered.
''All that mattered was momentum and winning in Iowa,'' Mr. Baldick said Wednesday. ''I would argue that more states on Feb. 5 makes that exponentially more true. That if you don't have momentum going into states like those four big states, then forget it and just go home.''
	Republicans gathered here this weekend acutely concerned with the elections ahead and distressed by the White House's performance since President Bush's re-election. They listened as a parade of prospective presidential candidates wrestled with how much to associate their campaigns with an increasingly unpopular sitting president.
In interviews, officials attending the Southern Republican Leadership Conference here described themselves as shaken by mistakes that have afflicted the White House, culminating with the collapse of the deal to allow a Dubai company to manage six American port terminals. Several urged the president to bring in new advisers to avoid losses in the midterm elections ahead and three fallow years in the White House.
Reflecting the political anxiety heading toward the 2008 election, the party's prospective presidential candidates, who spoke before about 2,000 here on Friday and Saturday, varied markedly in their handling of Mr. Bush as they dealt with what will clearly be a central strategic challenge for them.
Republicans said the complication for these candidates was that Mr. Bush remained highly popular with the party's conservative base, even in the face of deepening concerns across the electorate about his government and his policies.
On one side, Senator John McCain of Arizona offered a full embrace of a president he has quarreled with over the years -- Mr. Bush defeated him for the presidential nomination in an acrid campaign in 2000 -- as he urged Republicans to rally around Mr. Bush in a difficult time and to focus on the midterm elections ahead.
''We must keep our presidential ambitions a distant second to standing with the president of the United States,'' Mr. McCain said.
But in a hint of one way that this next generation of Republican presidential contenders is likely to diverge from the president, Mitt Romney, the governor of Massachusetts, went from heralding Mr. Bush's record on terrorism to embracing conservative concern about the growth of the size of government in his tenure.
''We are spending too much money,'' Mr. Romney said. ''Our discretionary spending -- taking out Iraq and mandatory spending -- grew 49 percent in four years. Our debt has grown. Pork is always dispiriting. But pork being spent at a time of war is particularly dispiriting.''
Senator George Allen of Virginia went from noting his support of Mr. Bush's tax cuts to calling for tough immigration controls that stood in obvious contrast to Mr. Bush's efforts to permit some illegal immigrants to work in the United States.
''Let's just say this: the president's position on all of this is not all that clear,'' Mr. Allen said after delivering his speech. ''I want to be plain and clear: what we need to do is secure our borders.''
Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee praised Mr. Bush's success at ''reshaping the federal judiciary,'' though he said that his own maneuvers as the Senate majority leader had stymied Democrats from using filibusters to block judges and cleared the way for Mr. Bush.
''Because we acted,'' Mr. Frist said, ''as we sit here today, a new chief justice -- Chief Justice John Roberts -- serves at the helm of the highest court in the land. And Sam Alito sits at his side.''
In addition to Mr. McCain, Mr. Romney and Mr. Allen, the other potential candidates who spoke included Mr. Frist, Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas and Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas.
Several Republicans said the huge turnout at the meeting, a biannual conference attended by elected officials and party members, was evidence that many were anxious for a respite from bad news and ready to look beyond the Bush presidency.
''There's a lot of frustration here -- we've had a run of real bad luck,'' said Tom Rath, a New Hampshire Republican leader. ''You've got such longevity in that White House team that they are tired. They need a break. They need a big piece of good luck. I don't know what it is.''
James H. Herring, the chairman of the Mississippi Republican Party, said, ''They need to minimize these self-inflicted wounds.''
Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina said of Mr. Bush: ''He's right about Social Security. He's right about the big things of his time. Executing has been a problem. Implementing has been a problem.''
At the same time, Mr. Graham criticized his own party for allowing spending to increase, noting that Mr. Bush had yet to veto a single spending bill. ''We're growing the government at a pace that makes Democrats look thrifty,'' he said.
Several Republicans here said Mr. Bush urgently needed to shake up his staff. Senator Norm Coleman, Republican of Minnesota, pointed to what he described as a series of management and political failures as he urged Mr. Bush to bring in a new team.
''There is some question about whether those around him have served him well,'' Mr. Coleman said. ''This president has strong support in the United States Senate -- in many ways, a lot of our fates are tied to him. We want him to be popular, we want the public to support him. But there have been problems.''
Some senior Republicans with ties to the White House, who asked for anonymity because they did not want to be identified describing internal White House deliberations, said there was a widespread feeling here that Mr. Bush would be well served to bring in new advisers, either replacing Andrew H. Card Jr., his chief of staff, or Karl Rove, his senior political adviser.
But one Republican with close ties to the White House said the investigation of Mr. Rove's role in leaking the name of a C.I.A. operative was making it nearly impossible to make any changes until it was resolved.
The session here was brimming with Republican faces new and old, drawn by the prospect of getting a first glimpse of the party's presidential lineup for 2008. The strong interest reflects the fact that this is perhaps the most wide-open Republican primary since 1980, when Ronald Reagan was nominated.
The session culminated with a straw poll of delegates, organized by The Hotline, a political newsletter. The results were clouded by a request by Mr. McCain that his supporters cast write-in votes for President Bush, as a show of support for the president.
Mr. Frist won 37 percent of the 1,427 ballots cast, an unsurprising result in his home state: 82 percent of his votes came from Tennessee.
Mr. Romney came in second with 14 percent of the vote.
Mr. Bush and Mr. Allen tied at 10 percent, while Mr. McCain drew 5 percent, Mr. Huckabee 4 percent and Mr. Brownback 1.5 percent.
The extent of Mr. McCain's embrace of Mr. Bush was striking, and Republicans here suggested it reflected two political facts: that he needed to reassure conservatives of his loyalty to Mr. Bush, and that, at this point, he was in a strong enough position in this field to have flexibility in presenting himself.
Mr. McCain went so far as to condemn the collapse of the port deal, saying that Congress had served Mr. Bush poorly by not permitting a 45-day review of security concerns, though he did not mention that the deal was sunk by fellow Republicans.
''The president deserved better,'' Mr. McCain said.
Mr. McCain praised the president for his failed effort to rewrite the Social Security system, said he supported the decision to go into Iraq and blistered at critics who suggested the White House had fabricated evidence of unconventional weapons in Iraq to justify the invasion.
''Anybody who says the president of the United States is lying about weapons of mass destruction is lying,'' Mr. McCain said.
Mr. Romney's criticism of spending in the past four years drew a wave of applause and captured what has been a subject of increasing unhappiness by this White House. But Mr. Romney tempered that implicit criticism by praising Mr. Bush's record on terrorism. ''Thank heavens we have a president who recognizes the extent of this threat,'' he said. ''Thank heavens the president recognizes the greatest ally peace has on this planet is a strong United States.''
By contrast, Mr. Huckabee barely mentioned Mr. Bush in his speech, though he warmly invoked the legacies of Mr. Bush's father and Ronald Reagan.
''George Bush's 1,000 points of light and Ronald Reagan's Morning in America resonate with Americans,'' he said.
For Republicans, the prospect of continuing problems for this White House has implications for their political ambitions in the next two elections and for their hopes of using this period of one-party control to advance the conservative agenda Mr. Bush ran on.
Several speakers warned Republicans in the room to ignore the hoopla in the hotel and to focus on 2006 and not 2008, saying that the party was vulnerable to losses in the House and Senate that could undercut any hope it has to push through major legislative programs.
''We cannot afford big losses this year,'' said Gov. Haley Barbour of Mississippi, a former national Republican chairman, noting that every two-term Republican president since World War II had suffered big Congressional losses in the sixth year of his term.
Mr. McCain, speaking to reporters after his speech Friday night, said, ''We don't have any doubt that we have a great challenge here.''
Some Republicans said the difficulties Mr. Bush faced might be exaggerated or, at the least, repairable. Clarke Reed, a veteran Mississippi Republican leader and the founder of this conference, said the task for Mr. Bush was simple.
''Get focused -- stay focused,'' Mr. Reed said as he watched the procession of Republicans stream by him in the Peabody Hotel. ''I don't think it's that bad. But I think that if the perception is that it's that bad, that is a problem.''
Senator Graham warned that such a Republican mindset could be a recipe for defeat this November. ''It's like we're the party worried about losing,'' he said. ''We need to become the party focused on winning.''
Mr. Huckabee warned against Republicans' turning gloomy. ''Attitude determined altitude,'' he said. ''If we think we're in trouble, we're in trouble. I don't think we are.''
	Presidential campaign fund-raising operations are usually run well out of public sight, reflecting their status as essential, if slightly unseemly, requirements for running for the White House.
That is what made what happened here early Monday morning striking. Over 400 people, including corporate executives, governors, wealthy Republican donors and party operatives, gathered around telephones and computer screens stretched out over a huge convention center room for a day of public fund-raising on behalf of Mitt Romney, the former Massachusetts governor who created a presidential exploratory committee last week. Television camera crews and reporters circled the room as Mr. Romney's aides provided a running tally of how much had been raised.
For Mr. Romney, this high-tech fund-raiser, with new fund-raising software rolled out to mark the occasion, amounted to a public declaration for the White House, as he marched out with his family for his first major event since leaving the Statehouse.
And as Mr. Romney announced at day's end that he had drawn a $6.5 million one-day haul in cash and commitments, it was also a striking example of just how important fund-raising has become as a test for presidential viability, this year more than most, with the race dominated by high-profile candidates, most of whom are unlikely to participate in the public financing system.
''This has never been done before,'' Mr. Romney said, standing in the middle of an elaborate set, a wireless microphone planted on his body. ''This is the most advanced technology ever employed as a fund-raising effort.''
Politically, the display of fund-raising and organizational prowess was intended to put Mr. Romney back on the map after a tough month in which his conservative credentials have come under attack because of questions about his evolving positions on abortion and gay rights. If the immediate audience for this fund-raising event were his own supporters and the press, it was aimed just as much at other prospective Republican candidates. Those include Senator John McCain of Arizona and Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York mayor, but also some lesser-known candidates on the right, like Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas and Mike Huckabee, the former governor of Arizona, who have been emboldened at the sight of Mr. Romney struggling.
''It's going to send a strong message to McCain as well as to Giuliani, but also to all those other guys who might be thinking of getting in,'' said Thomas R. Tellefsen, who was recruited from the upper ranks of President Bush's fund-raisers to spend a day sitting in front of a computer screen.
Spencer Zwick, a longtime Romney associate who is now his national finance director, said: ''We do know in political fund-raising, money talks, but early money screams. That's what we're trying to do.''
No expense was spared for ''The National Call Day'' in the gleaming new Boston Convention and Exhibition Center. Callers were delivered boxed lunches at their seats. Huge video screens displayed a biographical film of Mr. Romney, who dutifully emphasized his opposition to abortion rights and same-sex marriage. The software, based on programs used by telemarketing sales forces, was designed exclusively for Mr. Romney and called ComMITT.
''People are waiting to see Ed McMahon flash up the latest number on the tote board,'' said Tom Rath, a veteran New Hampshire Republican leader who is a senior adviser to Mr. Romney.
The Romney campaign, indulging in a rather old trick from the political book, started off the day with a low-ball prediction that they would gather $1 million in pledges and commitments. With a group this large, and this well connected, a take like that would have been disappointing, so the final result gave Mr. Romney a chance to come out and announce he was ''blown away'' by the outcome.
Mr. Romney's supporters came armed with lists of friends and, in the case of politicians, their own contributors. A lot of internal planning had gone into the day, so the recipients of calls asking for donations of $2,100, the legal limit, were not surprised. And Mr. Romney was certainly not taking any chances. When it came time for him to make a fund-raising call, piped over the loudspeaker and in front of a crush of cameras, he chose to call his older sister, Lynn Keenan, at her home outside Detroit.
Still the image of, say, the governor of Missouri, Matt Blunt, sitting at one table, and the head of a major corporation dialing for dollars was certainly unusual.
''I've never done anything like this before,'' said Meg Whitman, the chief executive of eBay, in a break from her callers. ''I start out by saying: 'You won't believe where I am! I'm at the Boston Convention Center with four or five hundred other people dialing for contributions for Mitt Romney.' ''
The figure put out by Mr. Romney includes pledges as well as checks, Mr. Romney's aides said they were confident that most of that money would also come in. It also was the result of going after what Mr. Tellefsen called ''low-hanging fruit.''
Mr. Romney laughed when asked if he thought the campaign would be able to keep up this pace, though he characterized it as an affirmation of the potential appeal of a candidate who remains relatively little-known outside Republican circles.
''I don't think $6.5 million a day is likely to be sustained,'' he said, adding, ''This is not a big flash and disappearance.''
Mr. Romney's advisers have said they would like to raise around $100 million before the primaries. With the presidential primary contests coming fast and early next year, there is a premium on candidates' raising money as quickly as possible so they can leave the telephones and be free to do public events in early primary states.
Correction:  January 10, 2007, Wednesday  An article yesterday about the presidential campaign of Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, misidentified the home state of Mike Huckabee, another former governor who is also a prospective Republican candidate for president. He was the governor of Arkansas, not Arizona.
	At a time when considerable political attention is focused on the Democrats' uphill struggle to recapture Congress, leaders of both parties say Democrats appear to be in a much stronger position on another pivotal battlefield this November, the contests for governors.
Democrats have a strong chance to pick up a number of seats held by Republicans while keeping seats even in states that President Bush won in 2004, potentially allowing Democrats to put their view of government on display across a bigger swath of the country and strengthening their position for the 2008 presidential race, party officials said.
Among the states that could flip to the Democratic column are Arkansas, Colorado, Florida, Nevada and Ohio, all general election battlegrounds carried by Mr. Bush, as well as New York and perhaps California.
''From a math standpoint, we've got a tough row to hoe this year,'' Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, the head of the Republican Governors Association, said as the National Governors Association gathered here this weekend for its annual Washington meeting.
Mr. Romney, whose decision not to seek re-election as he explores a run for president has put his own state in play for Democrats, said Republicans could suffer a net loss of as many as four governorships if the political environment for his party did not improve.
Some Democrats and independent analysts said the shift could end up being even more pronounced if the problems that have plagued Republicans in Washington continue to mount and Mr. Bush remains politically weakened. They said the furor over a Dubai company's taking over some operations at six American ports had provided them another opportunity to put Republicans on the defensive. They noted that Gov. Robert L. Ehrlich Jr. of Maryland, a vulnerable incumbent, was among the first Republicans to step forward to question the deal, which includes the Baltimore port.
''I think we can pick up between five and seven,'' said Howard Dean, the Democratic national chairman. ''This is going to be a national election if I have anything to do with it: a national referendum on whether you want Republicans to keep running this country and whether you want them to keep running your state.''
Jennifer Duffy, an analyst for The Cook Political Report who tracks national races, said of Democrats, ''If they don't get a majority, they are going to come awfully close.'' The Democrats would need a net gain of four governorships for a majority.
Beyond the potentially considerable effect on education, health, transportation and other policy issues in the states, the outcome could have substantial implications for the 2008 presidential race. As Mr. Bush showed in Ohio and Florida, having a friendly governor can be critical in close general elections. As a result, this year's contests are of considerable interest to presidential contenders in both parties, many of whom are current or former governors.
''People underestimate the value of a Republican governor during a presidential cycle,'' said Gov. Mike Huckabee, the Republican governor of Arkansas and a potential presidential candidate. ''It helps a lot.''
The potential shift is a result of a political map of statehouses that is as challenging to Republicans as the Congressional map is difficult for Democrats. There are 22 Republican governor seats in contention, compared with 14 for Democrats.
State economies are generally doing well, helping to increase tax revenue, pay for new or expanded programs and provide a positive environment for incumbents. But whatever advantage the economy may hold for Republicans is offset to some degree by term limits, which are forcing many of their incumbents to step aside. Five sitting Republicans, including Jeb Bush in Florida and Mr. Huckabee, are barred from running again, creating open seats. No Democratic governor is facing a term limit this year.
There are now 28 Republican governors and 22 Democratic. Seven Republicans are not seeking re-election, in Arkansas, Colorado, Florida, Massachusetts, Nevada, New York and Ohio. Only one Democrat is stepping aside: Tom Vilsack of Iowa, who is looking at a run for president.
''It's not a pretty picture out there,'' said Joe Gaylord, a Republican consultant.
Democrats do have some of their own problems for November.
In Pennsylvania, Gov. Edward G. Rendell, a Democrat seeking a second term, is girding for a prospectively strong challenge from Lynn Swann, the former star football player for the Pittsburgh Steelers. In Michigan, Gov. Jennifer M. Granholm, one of the Democrats' most poised candidates, is struggling with a sour economy and facing a well-financed challenge from Richard M. DeVos, a former chairman and co-founder of the Amway Corporation.
Republicans said they hoped to mount a strong challenge to Gov. James E. Doyle, a Wisconsin Democrat, with Representative Mark Green. To a lesser extent, Democrats said they were concerned about keeping Maine, Oregon and Illinois.
And the decision by Mr. Vilsack not to seek re-election means Democrats could lose Iowa. ''It's a very tough seat,'' Mr. Vilsack said Saturday. ''The state has only elected seven Democrats in our history.''
Still, Republicans seem to be in a tougher spot. Analysts said Democrats had a chance of picking up Alaska, Arkansas, Colorado, Maryland, Massachusetts, Nevada, New York, Ohio and -- possibly, though less likely -- Alabama, California, Florida and Minnesota.
''Massachusetts, Arkansas are really Democratic states, but we have Republican governors,'' Mr. Huckabee said. ''I think we can keep a Republican governor in Arkansas, but it's going to be a challenge.''
To the frustration of Republican leaders, Democratic governors in states where Mr. Bush won convincingly in 2004 seem to be doing very well, including those in Arizona, Kansas, Oklahoma and Wyoming.
Of all the states in play, the most closely watched is probably Ohio, where Gov. Bob Taft is being forced out by term limits, under a cloud of scandal that has left Republicans fearful of a rout this November. Representative Ted Strickland is the most likely Democratic candidate.
To the delight of some Democrats, a fierce primary has broken out on the Republican side between J. Kenneth Blackwell, the secretary of state, and Jim Petro, the attorney general.
''I wish we could have the election yesterday,'' Mr. Strickland said. ''Right now, Democrats are in a superb position in Ohio.''
Presidential contenders are paying particularly close mind to what is happening in states likely to be at the center of the 2008 presidential race.
''Governorships are important to the presidential races,'' Mr. Romney said. ''I don't want to overstate that, but I would think it helped in Florida to have the president's brother there.''
Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico, the head of the Democratic Governors Association and a potential presidential candidate, said: ''People caring about '08 should really care about '06 and the governors' races. Governors are where the future of politics are.''
For Republicans, the other concern is the potential for the outcome of this year's races to influence the legislative redistricting that will follow the 2010 census, especially if 2006 is the beginning of a resurgence in the national strength of the Democrats. Mr. Gaylord said the 2006 election could be parallel to 1994, when Republicans made national gains that put them in a commanding position when it came time to redraw district lines after the 2000 census.
Mr. Gaylord said one reason Republicans did so well in the 2002 Congressional elections was because of Republican successes in 1994. ''It went so deep at the state and local levels that the Democrats could never turn it back around,'' he said.
Democratic governors were clearly confident as they confronted the Bush administration on issues including port security, health care and immigration, in what amounted to a map for the campaign ahead.
Gov. Kathleen Sebelius, a Kansas Democrat who is favored in her re-election bid in a state where Mr. Bush won 62 percent of the vote, said ethics and competence would be among the most crucial issues for Democrats in 2006.
''People demand competence at a bare minimum,'' she said. ''They want to believe that elected officials have their best interests at heart, not special interests.''
	The Democratic presidential nomination battle turned into a two-man contest on Tuesday as Senator John Kerry narrowly defeated Senator John Edwards in the Wisconsin primary. Howard Dean suffered a dismal third-place showing that Democrats said would effectively end his campaign.
The finish by Mr. Edwards startled Democrats here, as well as those in the Kerry and Edwards camps, who had been looking for Mr. Kerry to post another decisive victory in Wisconsin, based on his performance so far this year.
And it set the stage for what Mr. Edwards said he had long wanted after trying to break through what was once a crowded field: a clean two-way race with Mr. Kerry, played out over a relatively long period, until the next big primary day, March 2.
''The people of Wisconsin spoke loudly and clearly tonight,'' Mr. Edwards said in a jubilant speech to supporters. ''They want a debate. They want this campaign to continue.''
Mr. Kerry, who stepped out to give his victory speech as Mr. Edwards was speaking, knocking him off live television, made no mention of the thin margin.
''The motto of the state of Wisconsin is 'Forward','' Mr. Kerry said. ''And I want to thank the state of Wisconsin for moving this cause and this campaign forward tonight here in this great state.''
At 11:25 p.m., with 99 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Kerry had 326,299 votes, or 40 percent, and Mr. Edwards had 282,581, or 34 percent. Dr. Dean received 150,180 votes (18 percent), while Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio had 27,139 (3 percent), and the Rev. Al Sharpton gained 14,434 votes (2 percent).
Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, said even before the polls closed that he would continue his campaign no matter what the outcome in Wisconsin, a state he once said he had to win.
''We are not done,'' he said in his speech on Tuesday.
But leading Democrats said that in light of his latest disappointing loss, they saw little hope for his continuing as a serious candidate. And while Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards turned their attention to March 2, when there will be 10 contests, Dr. Dean prepared to head back to his home in Burlington to determine where to take his campaign from here.
A critical question now, some Democrats said, is whether Dr. Dean, who has not won a single contest, withdraws from the race and throws his support to Mr. Edwards or Mr. Kerry. A survey of voters leaving the polls found that those who said they had once intended to support Dr. Dean split evenly between Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry.
Mr. Edwards's strong showing came in a state with a maverick tradition, going back to when John F. Kennedy upset Hubert H. Humphrey in the 1960 Democratic presidential primary. It also came in a state where any registered voter may participate in the Democratic primary, and 40 percent of those who voted on Tuesday said they were not Democrats.
As in Iowa, Mr. Edwards appears to have gained strength in the final days of the campaign, in what many Democrats said was a testament to strong campaign skills. He won the endorsement of two of the state's major newspapers. And not incidentally, several Democrats said, he might have benefited from what had been Dr. Dean's central message, as he urged voters here not to rubber-stamp the Kerry nomination, and allow the process to continue.
''Everyone I talk to, conservatives and liberals, say we want to keep it going at least until sometime in March,'' said Mary Citizen, 59, who lives in West Bend, Wis., and was waving a flag at Dr. Dean's election-night party in a Madison hotel. ''Every time these guys get up on a stage they're throwing ideas at us. We're still shopping. It's not a done deal.''
Mr. Edwards's aides expressed confidence that the jolt of excitement that would accompany his showing would bring him enough favorable publicity to help compensate for any financial advantage Mr. Kerry might have. They argued that this two-week period would allow Mr. Edwards to capitalize on what his aides have long argued are misgivings among Democrats about Mr. Kerry, and give voters more time to get acquainted with Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards won the support of 50 percent of the Democrats who said they made up their minds over the last three days, according to the survey of voters leaving the polls. And should the race go on until March 9, Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, will be competing with Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, in four Southern states.
''We've been saying all along that voters are still looking for a choice,'' said David Ginsberg, Mr. Edwards's communications director. ''It's a pretty good thing to have a candidate that the more they see him, the more they like him.''
Mr. Kerry's advisers noted that Mr. Edwards had so far won only in the state of his birth, South Carolina, and expressed doubt that he could catch up. Before Tuesday, party leaders from across the nation had been urging Democrats to coalesce around Mr. Kerry as the party's likely nominee.
Mr. Kerry's victory here was apparently his narrowest yet; still, he has now won in 15 of the 17 states where there have been contests, in many cases by double-digit margins. He has displayed strength in all voters groups.
''I know this was closer than he thought, but to go from state to state, win for win, I just think that is a good thing for Senator Kerry,'' Gov. James E. Doyle of Wisconsin, a Democrat who has not endorsed a candidate, said in an interview. ''That's a tremendous kind of momentum.''
Still, the developments here on Tuesday signaled that a race that many Democrats had seen as all but over would roll on -- at least into March. And while Mr. Kerry would appear in some ways to have a lopsided advantage over Mr. Edwards -- before Tuesday, he had 448 delegates compared with 161 for Mr. Edwards -- the result in Wisconsin, a swing state in a general election, seems certain to raise questions about the central claim of Mr. Kerry's campaign: that he is the strongest Democrat the party has to send up against President Bush.
Mr. Edwards's showing came as a surprise both because Mr. Kerry had swamped him in state after state and because a series of pre-primary polls showed Mr. Kerry with a large lead. Because of the open primary, Wisconsin is a difficult state to poll.
Still, the practical result was that anything less than a substantial victory by Mr. Kerry could be portrayed by his opponents as a setback, which is what was happening throughout the day as the campaigns got early glimpses of the results of surveys of voters leaving the polls.
Mr. Edwards suggested in an interview this week that Mr. Kerry's run of victories was a function of his riding the wave of support created by victories in Iowa and New Hampshire, and that his standing would erode under the scrutiny of Democratic voters. He argued that he tended to grow in strength the more time he spent in a state.
That said, Democrats contended that Mr. Edwards urgently needed to begin winning. Tuesday's contest was the sixth in which he placed second; he has come in fourth seven times.
And Mr. Kerry's advisers scoffed at the notion that Mr. Edwards had a legitimate claim on being part of two-man contest.
''I don't see this as a two-person race because we're running against someone who has won one state,'' a senior Kerry adviser said. ''This whole idea that you sort of cherry-pick the states you are going to compete in -- that's a vanity game, it's not a real game.''
Mr. Kerry said Tuesday, before the polls closed, that he would campaign aggressively across the nation. ''I'm not selectively picking one state or another to wage my campaign in,'' he said. ''I'm waging my campaign all across the country in all states.''
The survey of voters leaving the polls found that in Wisconsin, as almost everywhere else this year, voters were looking for a strong challenger to Mr. Bush.
Mr. Kerry did best with those for whom electability was most important -- getting 70 percent of their support. Mr. Edwards drew the support of about 45 percent of those who said caring was the most important quality.
The survey of voters leaving the polling places was conducted by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International for the television networks and The Associated Press.
In Madison on Tuesday, Mary Crave, 47, an adult education teacher, said she voted for Mr. Kerry.
''He's the most electable,'' Ms. Crave said. ''I like Edwards, but I don't think he's ready yet to gather the troops. I'm sort of an anybody-but-Bush voter.''
Steven Kleiss, 36, a banker, said he voted for Mr. Edwards.
''He stayed the most consistent throughout the debates and the race,'' Mr. Kleiss said. ''It seems like the other candidates have shifted based on what's popular, but he stayed on message better.''
How the Poll Was Conducted
The poll was based on questionnaires completed by voters on Tuesday as they left voting places throughout Wisconsin.
It was conducted by Edison Media Research of Somerville, N.J., and Mitofsky International of New York City for the National Election Pool, a consortium of ABC News, Associated Press, CBS News, CNN, Fox News, and NBC News.
The results are based on 2,238 voters in 40 randomly selected precincts across Wisconsin.
In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results from such polls should differ by no more than plus or minus three percentage points from what would have been obtained by seeking to interview all voters in the Wisconsin Democratic primary.
Results based on smaller subgroups have a larger potential sampling error. In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of voter opinion on an election day, like the reluctance of some people to take time to fill out the questionnaire, may introduce other sources of error.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
	The Democratic presidential candidates repeatedly pummeled Howard Dean at a debate here on Sunday, in a raucous series of exchanges on taxes and trade that reflected how tight the Iowa caucuses have become 15 days before the vote.
For two hours, during a blustery afternoon snowstorm, seven of the nine contenders took advantage of what is likely to be one of the most prominent platforms left before the Jan. 19 caucuses. They promoted themselves, laid out the themes of their campaigns and attacked their opponents, underscoring the pivotal nature of the contest.
The debate also highlighted an emerging subplot here: the fight for No. 2 -- or, in the tradition of Iowa caucuses, with their wide field and first position on the calendar, No. 3.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, a low-voltage presence in past debates, repeatedly took on Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri. The two clashed in particular over the depth of their opposition to free trade treaties, an issue that Mr. Gephardt has made a centerpiece of his appeal in a state where there is strong opposition among Democrats to pacts like the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Still, the candidate of the day was, once again, Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont. When the candidates were offered an opportunity to question one another, four turned their fire on Dr. Dean, leaving no doubt about the pressure they feel to block him from a victory here that could propel him to his party's nomination.
''My question, not surprisingly, is to Howard Dean,'' said Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut. Mr. Lieberman noted that Dr. Dean had declined to release all public papers from when he was governor, and pressed him to settle the issue here, before the cameras at a television studio on the outskirts of Des Moines.
''The people of America, who are judging your candidacy for president now, have a right to know what you did as governor to determine whether you're suitable and capable of being president of the United States,''' Mr. Lieberman said. ''I have in my hand the memorandum of understanding between you and the secretary of state, which makes very clear that all it takes to open up your records, Mr. Governor, is one stroke of a pen.''
But Dr. Dean brushed aside the entreaty from across the stage (he was too far away for Mr. Lieberman to walk over). He said a Vermont court would decide the question, which he defined as protecting the privacy of individuals who had written him. In particular, he cited Vermonters involved in the dispute over his signing of legislation allowing same-sex civil unions.
''Governors seal records for particular amounts of time -- in my case, some of the records -- to protect people's privacy, to protect the privacy that was given to advisers,'' Dr. Dean said.
''That is an unsatisfactory and disappointing answer,'' Mr. Lieberman responded. ''Why should you have to force a judge to force you to do what you know is right?''
A moment later, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts cited a series of pronouncements on foreign and domestic policy that Dr. Dean has made and then backed away from as evidence of Dr. Dean's potential weakness as a Democratic candidate, or as a president.
''When you were asked by The Concord Monitor about Osama bin Laden, you said you couldn't prejudge his guilt for September 11th,'' Mr. Kerry said, scrunching up his face and turning incredulously to Dr. Dean. ''What in the world were you thinking?''
Dr. Dean responded by citing the primacy of law.
''As an American, I want to see Osama bin Laden get what he deserves, which is the death penalty,'' Dr. Dean responded. ''But I was asked that question as a candidate for president of the United States. And a candidate for president of the United States is obligated to stand for the rule of law.''
The debate here, sponsored by The Des Moines Register and Iowa Public Television, marked the start of what all the campaigns view as the final and most intense phase of the contest in Iowa.
Even so, two of the Democratic candidates skipped the event: Gen. Wesley K. Clark and the Rev. Al Sharpton, neither of whom has been campaigning here.
Mr. Lieberman also made a decision to skip the caucuses. But he flew in specifically for this debate, and to seize the opportunity to present himself to an audience outside Iowa as the Democrat willing to make the strongest challenge to Dr. Dean.
In the face of the attacks, Dr. Dean showed little sign of backing down. Refusing to assent to a call by Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio to agree to withdraw the troops in Iraq, he asserted that President Bush had made Iraq more dangerous.
''The president has created a national security danger in Iraq when none existed before,'' Dr. Dean said. None of his opponents challenged him on that statement.
And he reasserted, in the face of warnings by Democrats that the remark displayed navet about foreign policy, that the capture of Saddam Hussein had not improved safety for Americans at home.
Dr. Dean called Mr. Hussein ''a dreadful person,'' adding, ''I am delighted to see him behind bars, and I hope he gets what he deserves.'' But, he added: ''The fact is that since Saddam Hussein has been caught we've lost 23 additional troops. We now have for the first time American fighter jets escorting commercial airliners through American airspace.''
The candidates covered a vast amount of policy ground, for the most part restating what have become familiar positions after more than 25 debates. But some new avenues of discussion emerged.
Mr. Gephardt used the debate to remind voters of his vigorous opposition to free trade.
''Everybody up here, except Dennis, voted for Nafta and voted for the China agreement,'' he said. ''They did the wrong thing. I don't think we can win this race against George Bush with a trade policy that's exactly like George Bush's. I'm the only one who has led on this issue for over 20 years, and let me tell you what I think we need to do.''
Mr. Edwards, who has become increasingly vocal in opposing trade treaties, took issue with Mr. Gephardt's characterization, noting that he had not even been in Congress when Nafta was passed, and that he had opposed it.
''I think it is really important, as we go forward in this debate -- and we have a long time left -- that we be completely accurate and straightforward and honest with Iowa's caucusgoers about where we stand,'' he said sternly to Mr. Gephardt.
Mr. Gephardt responded, ''Well, John, you weren't in Congress when Nafta came up, so you couldn't vote, but you voted for the China ----'' before Mr. Edwards cut him off.
Mr. Edwards said, ''But you said I voted for it.'' Mr. Gephardt said, ''I understand.''
As Mr. Gephardt appeared to redden a bit, Mr. Edwards said, ''You understand?''
Mr. Gephardt responded: ''I'm quite willing to say that you weren't there, and you didn't vote for it. But you voted for the China agreement, and it's had a bad impact here in Iowa.''
The candidates also clashed over how much Mr. Bush's tax cut should be reinstated. Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt have called for rolling back all the tax cuts, and Dr. Dean disputed the suggestion by Mr. Edwards, Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Kerry that the middle-class tax cut included in the Bush plan was significant.
''Middle-class people did not see a tax cut,'' he said. ''There was no middle-class tax cut. It was a Bush tax increase with tuitions, with property taxes, with health care.''
Suddenly, and finally, Dr. Dean found a rare and unlikely ally as he talked against the Bush tax plan.
''I agree with Howard on this,'' Mr. Gephardt said. ''I think we have got to offer a real choice, if we are going to beat George Bush. I'm ready to say to the people of the country, if you like the Bush tax cuts, vote for Bush. But if you want health care that can never be taken away from you, vote for me.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE DEBATE
	On Friday morning, as the capital was enmeshed in a debate over President Bush's decision to send thousands more troops to Iraq, no one was more obviously searching for an alternate plan than Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, the New York Democrat and likely candidate for president.
Mrs. Clinton was airborne for Iraq, a visit that offered a platform to examine and perhaps alter her views on a war that she once voted to authorize but now criticizes. Asked in a telephone interview from Kuwait whether this trip might lead her to support setting a firm deadline for the withdrawal of all American troops, which would be a change in her position, she responded: ''Those are questions that we'll be better able to answer later. Obviously I'll have more to say when I get back.''
Around the same time in Washington, Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican and likely candidate for president, threw the White House something of a lifeline during a Congressional hearing (which Mrs. Clinton herself was supposed to attend), vigorously defending Mr. Bush's decision.
''Potentially catastrophic consequences of failure demand that we do all we can to prevail in Iraq,'' Mr. McCain said.
As the politics of the war continue to shift, no prospective presidential candidates face more intensive scrutiny of their views or greater risk to their ambitions than Mr. McCain and Mrs. Clinton.
Long a proponent of sending more American forces into the fight, Mr. McCain now more than ever is linked to a war that has splintered his party and lost public support.
Viewed with suspicion by elements of her party because she has not explicitly repudiated her October 2002 vote authorizing military action against Iraq, Mrs. Clinton, who was in Baghdad on Saturday, has been trying to shore up her credentials as a critic of the war without exposing herself to charges of indecisiveness or flip-flopping of the sort that so damaged Senator John Kerry in his unsuccessful race against Mr. Bush in 2004.
More than any other single event in recent months, Mr. Bush's call for more troops has not only illuminated the positions taken by Mr. McCain and Mrs. Clinton and the differences between them, but it has also led the field of declared and prospective candidates circling them within their own parties to stake out more clearly defined positions on the war.
Among Republicans, a result has been a deep split suggesting that Mr. McCain will face challenges on the war from fellow Republicans long before he has to worry about Mrs. Clinton and other Democrats. Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts who had until this week declined to say whether he supported more troops, issued brief remarks supporting the president. Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York mayor, also supported it, comparing it to what he did in fighting crime as mayor.
But Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas, who is positioning himself as an alternative to Mr. McCain among conservatives, denounced Mr. Bush's plan, as did Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, who like Mr. McCain is a Vietnam veteran but who long ago broke with the White House over its handling of the war.
Among Democrats, opposition to Mr. Bush's plan highlighted the political threat Mrs. Clinton faces from the left. John Edwards, the former senator from North Carolina who voted for the war in 2002 but who, unlike Mrs. Clinton, later renounced his vote, sent an e-mail message to his supporters urging them to oppose Mr. Bush's action.
Senator Barack Obama of Illinois, who joined the Senate in 2005 and thus escaped the Iraq vote that has come to haunt Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry, used the platform of Senate hearings to lacerate the Bush Iraq policy and affirm his own opposition to the war.
Their actions offered an obvious contrast with those of Mrs. Clinton, who put out a measured statement opposing the troop increase but has stayed away from the Senate vanguard opposing Mr. Bush's latest strategy.
Still, none of the other potential 2008 presidential candidates have seen their ambitions complicated by the events this week as much as Mr. McCain and Mrs. Clinton have. Their responses to Mr. Bush's actions offered insights into their views on Iraq and the styles they would bring to a presidential campaign.
Mr. McCain embarked on a high-profile television tour announcing his support for Mr. Bush's move. In an interview, he said he would have preferred that the White House send in even more troops, and noted that he had pressed this position on the White House, unsuccessfully until now, for more than two years. It is a position that Mr. McCain and his advisers -- and some other Republicans -- said could end up destroying his presidential ambitions.
''Friends, advisers, enemies said this could be very damaging,'' Mr. McCain said. ''I can't worry about that, and I'm not going to worry about that.''
Some Republicans suggested that Mr. McCain's position could help him, albeit to a limited extent, among conservative Republican primary voters who have been wary of his view on social issues. And, as Mr. McCain's own remarks suggested, his stance fits neatly into his effort over the years to present himself as a politician given to candor even if it means telling voters things they do not want to hear.
Still, by any measure, support for the war could make things extremely difficult for Mr. McCain in a general election if the situation in Iraq does not improve and public opinion in the United States does not shift in favor of continued engagement.
Mr. McCain did not dispute the political risks entailed in the stance he had taken.
''The consequences of failure are more important than a political career,'' he said. ''It could hurt me in a primary and it could hurt me in a general election. This could hurt me in history.''
He said he was hopeful that this new Iraq strategy would work but did not know how long it would take, a crucial question in trying to gauge how central an issue this will be as the campaign engages.
In a hint of what next year could be like, Mr. Edwards has taken to calling the Bush proposal an endorsement of ''the McCain doctrine,'' a description that Mr. McCain and his aides have gamely embraced.
''I was glad to see that Romney and Giuliani have come around to embracing the McCain doctrine, as John Edwards would say,'' said Terry Nelson, the head of Mr. McCain's presidential exploratory committee.
If Mr. McCain has flaunted his unpopular position, Mrs. Clinton has clearly kept a lower altitude as she tries to deal with a barrage of conflicting pressures. Unlike Mr. McCain and Mr. Obama, who were everywhere on television the night of Mr. Bush's speech, Mrs. Clinton simply issued a late-evening e-mail statement saying that based on what Mr. Bush had said, she did not support the increase.
Last year, Mrs. Clinton took a leading role in criticizing Donald H. Rumsfeld, then the secretary of defense, over his management of the war. Over the past two years, she has voted in favor of resolutions calling for a phased withdrawal of troops without setting fixed deadlines.
Even though Mrs. Clinton has never gone as far as Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry with a renunciation of her 2002 vote, she has subtly expanded her position recently in recognition, her advisers said, of how much that vote accounted for the resistance to her among some Democrats.
In a little-noticed interview on the ''Today'' show just before Christmas, Mrs. Clinton made a significant addition to her standard remark about the 2002 vote. Asked if she considered the vote a mistake, she responded: ''Obviously if we knew then what we know now, there wouldn't have been a vote, and I certainly wouldn't have voted that way.''
The last eight words are new for her.
Some Democrats suggested that Mrs. Clinton's trip this weekend was intended to give her an opportunity to move further away from that vote and against the president's policy.
''I will be spending time with the Iraqi leaders and sitting down and trying to get my own personal assessment of what their intentions are, what do they intend to do to take responsibility for their own security,'' she said in the interview. ''If they're not going to step up and try to bring some stability and end the violence in Baghdad, I don't care how many troops the president sends -- it's not going to be successful.''
Mrs. Clinton and Mr. McCain have no doubt learned a lesson from Mr. Kerry's problems in 2004 when he appeared to switch his position on the war: that inconsistency may well prove to be a bigger political sin than taking a position out of step with the electorate. Mrs. Clinton's associates have expressed concern that if she tries to switch her views on the war, reflecting what her advisers said was concern, she would appear weak as she campaigned during a time of war to become the nation's first female president.
	Senators John Edwards and John Kerry leveled a last-minute round of charges about each other's credentials on Monday, as Democrats marched toward a round of contests in seven states that party leaders said could transform the nomination battle by forcing some candidates out of the race.
The exchanges between Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry, conducted in the course of a day crammed with rallies, bus and jet rides, and telephone calls to supporters, reflected the significance of Tuesday's votes.
Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, who has said he must win South Carolina to keep his candidacy viable, broke his self-imposed vow of political civility on Monday, criticizing Mr. Kerry for supporting trade treaties that are highly unpopular here and for accepting contributions from lobbyists.
''We want someone who hasn't been there for 15 to 20 years, if you're going to bring change,'' Mr. Edwards told reporters here, referring to Mr. Kerry's service in the Senate. He added: ''I don't take contributions from lobbyists. He obviously does.''
Mr. Kerry, speaking with a Columbia, S.C., television station via satellite from Albuquerque, suggested that Mr. Edwards, who has spent five years in the Senate, did not have the experience to take on President Bush or to lead the nation in perilous times.
''This is not a time for on-the-job training in the White House for national security issues,'' Mr. Kerry said. A moment later, after the interview was over, in an aside that his aides insisted had not been intended for public consumption, Mr. Kerry mocked Mr. Edwards's claim that he was the strongest Democrat the party could put up against Mr. Bush because he was from the South.
''Edwards says he's the only one who can win states in the South,'' Mr. Kerry said to a senior aide, David Wade, in a remark that was picked up by a reporter's microphone. ''He can't win his own state.''
Even as he batted at Mr. Edwards, Mr. Kerry turned an eye to the general election, saying he had not made up his mind about whether to follow up attacks made by senior Democrats challenging Mr. Bush's record of attendance in the Air National Guard. On Sunday, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Terry McAuliffe, accused Mr. Bush of being AWOL, a reference to questions about whether Mr. Bush showed up at required drills in his final months of service.
Tuesday's contests, with 269 delegates at stake, stretch from Delaware to the Great Plains and the Southwest. But the day is particularly pivotal for Mr. Edwards, who is looking to a win here to keep his campaign going, and to Mr. Kerry, whose aides view Mr. Edwards as the biggest obstacle to a sweep of the contests Tuesday night that they said could almost guarantee him the nomination.
At one point on Monday, Mr. Edwards's chief spokesman, Jennifer Palmieri, disputed the suggestion that Mr. Edwards appeared to be abandoning his vow not to criticize his opponent.
''He's not going on the attack,'' Ms. Palmieri said. ''How is that an attack? It's not an attack. It's an important distinction for him. He does not take money from registered lobbyists.''
Mr. Edwards was criticizing Mr. Kerry for voting for the Nafta trade agreement, a pact that Mr. Edwards said he would have opposed had he been in the Senate, and for accepting contributions from lobbyists. Mr. Edwards has accepted contributions from former lobbyists, Ms. Palmieri said, but not current ones. His campaign manager is a former lobbyist.
Mr. Edwards is not the only Democrat whose political future may be riding on Tuesday's voting, -- with contests in Arizona, Delaware, Missouri, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma and South Carolina.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark is looking for a win in Oklahoma, after all but abandoning his effort here, and Democrats said that General Clark appeared to be in a strong position to win in that state, which has 40 delegates.
''I am one tough hombre, and I can stand against George W. Bush, and we will take him down,'' General Clark told a tiny audience of voters in a stop in New Mexico on Monday, using some of the more bellicose language of the day, and displaying his campaign's attempts to draw support from Hispanic voters.
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut was looking for a win in Delaware, though Democrats said that Mr. Kerry appeared to be in a strong position there, too.
General Clark, Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Edwards are all certain to face intense pressure to step aside on Wednesday if they fail to win a single state. An effort to clear the field is already being orchestrated by Mr. McAuliffe, who has been pushing for the party to rally around a nominee as soon as possible, to present a strong challenge to Mr. Bush.
''Our nominee could be closer at hand than we had ever imagined,'' said May Scheve, the Missouri Democratic leader.
The biggest obstacles to a Kerry sweep on Tuesday are Mr. Edwards here in South Carolina and General Clark in Oklahoma. Democrats described Mr. Kerry as being in a strong position in Missouri -- which has the most delegates, 74, at stake that night -- North Dakota, Arizona, Delaware and in New Mexico.
In New Mexico on Monday, Gov. Bill Richardson, a Democrat, turned up alongside Mr. Kerry. He climbed the stage, joined hands with Mr. Kerry for a victory pump into the air, and jumped down afterwards. A moment later, Mr. Richardson told reporters that he considered Mr. Kerry ''virtually unstoppable'' in New Mexico.
The events on Monday served to dramatize the extent of the collapse, at least for now, of Dr. Dean's campaign. Just three weeks ago, he had looked to Tuesday as the day when he would effectively seize the nomination by sweeping to victory in most of the states. Now, nearly out of money, Dr. Dean has no television advertisements running in any of the states, though he has campaigned in Arizona and New Mexico, in hopes of at least winning some delegates there.
He told reporters aboard his campaign plane that he expected to do best in New Mexico. Asked about his reversal of fortunes, he responded, ''It's just the same as it was a year ago: just put one foot in front of the other and keep going.''
And he also attacked Mr. Kerry's candidacy, saying he thought the senator would be a weak contender in the general election.
''He's going to have a hard time if he's the nominee,'' Dr. Dean said. ''I think electability's a real issue for him. He appears to change his mind so often.''
Dr. Dean went on to assert that Mr. Kerry's ''credibility is under enormous attack, repeatedly,'' citing his votes in favor of the use of force in Iraq and of President Bush's education plan.
''He has this pattern,'' Dr. Dean said, ''you saw it with No Child Left Behind, you saw it with the war, you see it with special interests, which I think is terribly damaging. It appears that his word is no good.''
Mr. Edwards was not the only one campaigning furiously through South Carolina. The Rev. Al Sharpton conducted his own bus trip, starting on Monday morning at the site of a 19th century slave market. Mr. Sharpton, the only black candidate remaining in the race, has long argued that he will do well in a primary where as much as 50 percent of the electorate is African-American.
In his appearance, Mr. Sharpton vowed that he would not run as an independent candidate if he lost his party's nomination. Dr. Dean made a similar pledge on Monday.
In a late move, South Carolina election officials dropped a requirement for voters to sign an oath binding them to the Democratic Party in order to vote in the primary. The move was expected to increase turnout by independents and perhaps Republicans, which some strategists said could help Mr. Edwards.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
	