Presidential campaign fund-raising operations are usually run well out of public sight, reflecting their status as essential, if slightly unseemly, requirements for running for the White House.
That is what made what happened here early Monday morning striking. Over 400 people, including corporate executives, governors, wealthy Republican donors and party operatives, gathered around telephones and computer screens stretched out over a huge convention center room for a day of public fund-raising on behalf of Mitt Romney, the former Massachusetts governor who created a presidential exploratory committee last week. Television camera crews and reporters circled the room as Mr. Romney's aides provided a running tally of how much had been raised.
For Mr. Romney, this high-tech fund-raiser, with new fund-raising software rolled out to mark the occasion, amounted to a public declaration for the White House, as he marched out with his family for his first major event since leaving the Statehouse.
And as Mr. Romney announced at day's end that he had drawn a $6.5 million one-day haul in cash and commitments, it was also a striking example of just how important fund-raising has become as a test for presidential viability, this year more than most, with the race dominated by high-profile candidates, most of whom are unlikely to participate in the public financing system.
''This has never been done before,'' Mr. Romney said, standing in the middle of an elaborate set, a wireless microphone planted on his body. ''This is the most advanced technology ever employed as a fund-raising effort.''
Politically, the display of fund-raising and organizational prowess was intended to put Mr. Romney back on the map after a tough month in which his conservative credentials have come under attack because of questions about his evolving positions on abortion and gay rights. If the immediate audience for this fund-raising event were his own supporters and the press, it was aimed just as much at other prospective Republican candidates. Those include Senator John McCain of Arizona and Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York mayor, but also some lesser-known candidates on the right, like Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas and Mike Huckabee, the former governor of Arizona, who have been emboldened at the sight of Mr. Romney struggling.
''It's going to send a strong message to McCain as well as to Giuliani, but also to all those other guys who might be thinking of getting in,'' said Thomas R. Tellefsen, who was recruited from the upper ranks of President Bush's fund-raisers to spend a day sitting in front of a computer screen.
Spencer Zwick, a longtime Romney associate who is now his national finance director, said: ''We do know in political fund-raising, money talks, but early money screams. That's what we're trying to do.''
No expense was spared for ''The National Call Day'' in the gleaming new Boston Convention and Exhibition Center. Callers were delivered boxed lunches at their seats. Huge video screens displayed a biographical film of Mr. Romney, who dutifully emphasized his opposition to abortion rights and same-sex marriage. The software, based on programs used by telemarketing sales forces, was designed exclusively for Mr. Romney and called ComMITT.
''People are waiting to see Ed McMahon flash up the latest number on the tote board,'' said Tom Rath, a veteran New Hampshire Republican leader who is a senior adviser to Mr. Romney.
The Romney campaign, indulging in a rather old trick from the political book, started off the day with a low-ball prediction that they would gather $1 million in pledges and commitments. With a group this large, and this well connected, a take like that would have been disappointing, so the final result gave Mr. Romney a chance to come out and announce he was ''blown away'' by the outcome.
Mr. Romney's supporters came armed with lists of friends and, in the case of politicians, their own contributors. A lot of internal planning had gone into the day, so the recipients of calls asking for donations of $2,100, the legal limit, were not surprised. And Mr. Romney was certainly not taking any chances. When it came time for him to make a fund-raising call, piped over the loudspeaker and in front of a crush of cameras, he chose to call his older sister, Lynn Keenan, at her home outside Detroit.
Still the image of, say, the governor of Missouri, Matt Blunt, sitting at one table, and the head of a major corporation dialing for dollars was certainly unusual.
''I've never done anything like this before,'' said Meg Whitman, the chief executive of eBay, in a break from her callers. ''I start out by saying: 'You won't believe where I am! I'm at the Boston Convention Center with four or five hundred other people dialing for contributions for Mitt Romney.' ''
The figure put out by Mr. Romney includes pledges as well as checks, Mr. Romney's aides said they were confident that most of that money would also come in. It also was the result of going after what Mr. Tellefsen called ''low-hanging fruit.''
Mr. Romney laughed when asked if he thought the campaign would be able to keep up this pace, though he characterized it as an affirmation of the potential appeal of a candidate who remains relatively little-known outside Republican circles.
''I don't think $6.5 million a day is likely to be sustained,'' he said, adding, ''This is not a big flash and disappearance.''
Mr. Romney's advisers have said they would like to raise around $100 million before the primaries. With the presidential primary contests coming fast and early next year, there is a premium on candidates' raising money as quickly as possible so they can leave the telephones and be free to do public events in early primary states.
Correction:  January 10, 2007, Wednesday  An article yesterday about the presidential campaign of Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, misidentified the home state of Mike Huckabee, another former governor who is also a prospective Republican candidate for president. He was the governor of Arkansas, not Arizona.
	On Friday morning, as the capital was enmeshed in a debate over President Bush's decision to send thousands more troops to Iraq, no one was more obviously searching for an alternate plan than Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, the New York Democrat and likely candidate for president.
Mrs. Clinton was airborne for Iraq, a visit that offered a platform to examine and perhaps alter her views on a war that she once voted to authorize but now criticizes. Asked in a telephone interview from Kuwait whether this trip might lead her to support setting a firm deadline for the withdrawal of all American troops, which would be a change in her position, she responded: ''Those are questions that we'll be better able to answer later. Obviously I'll have more to say when I get back.''
Around the same time in Washington, Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican and likely candidate for president, threw the White House something of a lifeline during a Congressional hearing (which Mrs. Clinton herself was supposed to attend), vigorously defending Mr. Bush's decision.
''Potentially catastrophic consequences of failure demand that we do all we can to prevail in Iraq,'' Mr. McCain said.
As the politics of the war continue to shift, no prospective presidential candidates face more intensive scrutiny of their views or greater risk to their ambitions than Mr. McCain and Mrs. Clinton.
Long a proponent of sending more American forces into the fight, Mr. McCain now more than ever is linked to a war that has splintered his party and lost public support.
Viewed with suspicion by elements of her party because she has not explicitly repudiated her October 2002 vote authorizing military action against Iraq, Mrs. Clinton, who was in Baghdad on Saturday, has been trying to shore up her credentials as a critic of the war without exposing herself to charges of indecisiveness or flip-flopping of the sort that so damaged Senator John Kerry in his unsuccessful race against Mr. Bush in 2004.
More than any other single event in recent months, Mr. Bush's call for more troops has not only illuminated the positions taken by Mr. McCain and Mrs. Clinton and the differences between them, but it has also led the field of declared and prospective candidates circling them within their own parties to stake out more clearly defined positions on the war.
Among Republicans, a result has been a deep split suggesting that Mr. McCain will face challenges on the war from fellow Republicans long before he has to worry about Mrs. Clinton and other Democrats. Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts who had until this week declined to say whether he supported more troops, issued brief remarks supporting the president. Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York mayor, also supported it, comparing it to what he did in fighting crime as mayor.
But Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas, who is positioning himself as an alternative to Mr. McCain among conservatives, denounced Mr. Bush's plan, as did Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, who like Mr. McCain is a Vietnam veteran but who long ago broke with the White House over its handling of the war.
Among Democrats, opposition to Mr. Bush's plan highlighted the political threat Mrs. Clinton faces from the left. John Edwards, the former senator from North Carolina who voted for the war in 2002 but who, unlike Mrs. Clinton, later renounced his vote, sent an e-mail message to his supporters urging them to oppose Mr. Bush's action.
Senator Barack Obama of Illinois, who joined the Senate in 2005 and thus escaped the Iraq vote that has come to haunt Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry, used the platform of Senate hearings to lacerate the Bush Iraq policy and affirm his own opposition to the war.
Their actions offered an obvious contrast with those of Mrs. Clinton, who put out a measured statement opposing the troop increase but has stayed away from the Senate vanguard opposing Mr. Bush's latest strategy.
Still, none of the other potential 2008 presidential candidates have seen their ambitions complicated by the events this week as much as Mr. McCain and Mrs. Clinton have. Their responses to Mr. Bush's actions offered insights into their views on Iraq and the styles they would bring to a presidential campaign.
Mr. McCain embarked on a high-profile television tour announcing his support for Mr. Bush's move. In an interview, he said he would have preferred that the White House send in even more troops, and noted that he had pressed this position on the White House, unsuccessfully until now, for more than two years. It is a position that Mr. McCain and his advisers -- and some other Republicans -- said could end up destroying his presidential ambitions.
''Friends, advisers, enemies said this could be very damaging,'' Mr. McCain said. ''I can't worry about that, and I'm not going to worry about that.''
Some Republicans suggested that Mr. McCain's position could help him, albeit to a limited extent, among conservative Republican primary voters who have been wary of his view on social issues. And, as Mr. McCain's own remarks suggested, his stance fits neatly into his effort over the years to present himself as a politician given to candor even if it means telling voters things they do not want to hear.
Still, by any measure, support for the war could make things extremely difficult for Mr. McCain in a general election if the situation in Iraq does not improve and public opinion in the United States does not shift in favor of continued engagement.
Mr. McCain did not dispute the political risks entailed in the stance he had taken.
''The consequences of failure are more important than a political career,'' he said. ''It could hurt me in a primary and it could hurt me in a general election. This could hurt me in history.''
He said he was hopeful that this new Iraq strategy would work but did not know how long it would take, a crucial question in trying to gauge how central an issue this will be as the campaign engages.
In a hint of what next year could be like, Mr. Edwards has taken to calling the Bush proposal an endorsement of ''the McCain doctrine,'' a description that Mr. McCain and his aides have gamely embraced.
''I was glad to see that Romney and Giuliani have come around to embracing the McCain doctrine, as John Edwards would say,'' said Terry Nelson, the head of Mr. McCain's presidential exploratory committee.
If Mr. McCain has flaunted his unpopular position, Mrs. Clinton has clearly kept a lower altitude as she tries to deal with a barrage of conflicting pressures. Unlike Mr. McCain and Mr. Obama, who were everywhere on television the night of Mr. Bush's speech, Mrs. Clinton simply issued a late-evening e-mail statement saying that based on what Mr. Bush had said, she did not support the increase.
Last year, Mrs. Clinton took a leading role in criticizing Donald H. Rumsfeld, then the secretary of defense, over his management of the war. Over the past two years, she has voted in favor of resolutions calling for a phased withdrawal of troops without setting fixed deadlines.
Even though Mrs. Clinton has never gone as far as Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry with a renunciation of her 2002 vote, she has subtly expanded her position recently in recognition, her advisers said, of how much that vote accounted for the resistance to her among some Democrats.
In a little-noticed interview on the ''Today'' show just before Christmas, Mrs. Clinton made a significant addition to her standard remark about the 2002 vote. Asked if she considered the vote a mistake, she responded: ''Obviously if we knew then what we know now, there wouldn't have been a vote, and I certainly wouldn't have voted that way.''
The last eight words are new for her.
Some Democrats suggested that Mrs. Clinton's trip this weekend was intended to give her an opportunity to move further away from that vote and against the president's policy.
''I will be spending time with the Iraqi leaders and sitting down and trying to get my own personal assessment of what their intentions are, what do they intend to do to take responsibility for their own security,'' she said in the interview. ''If they're not going to step up and try to bring some stability and end the violence in Baghdad, I don't care how many troops the president sends -- it's not going to be successful.''
Mrs. Clinton and Mr. McCain have no doubt learned a lesson from Mr. Kerry's problems in 2004 when he appeared to switch his position on the war: that inconsistency may well prove to be a bigger political sin than taking a position out of step with the electorate. Mrs. Clinton's associates have expressed concern that if she tries to switch her views on the war, reflecting what her advisers said was concern, she would appear weak as she campaigned during a time of war to become the nation's first female president.
	As many as four big states -- California, Florida, Illinois and New Jersey -- are likely to move up their 2008 presidential primaries to early next February, further upending an already unsettled nominating process and forcing candidates of both parties to rethink their campaign strategies, party officials said Wednesday.
The changes, which seem all but certain to be enacted by state legislatures, mean that the presidential candidates face the prospect of going immediately from an ordered series of early contests in relatively small states in January to a single-day, coast-to-coast battlefield in February, encompassing some of the most expensive advertising markets in the nation.
The changes would appear to benefit well-financed and already familiar candidates and diminish the prospects of those with less money and name recognition going into such a highly compressed series of contests early next year.
Associates of Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, the New York Democrat, and Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican, said that should either of them stumble early on, the respective party primaries in California and New Jersey -- two states that would seem particularly hospitable to them -- could offer an expensive but welcome firewall.
But at the same time, states like New Jersey and California could provide an opening for Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, who faces the daunting prospect of overcoming resistance among social conservatives in the Republican contests in Iowa and South Carolina in January.
And several party analysts suggested that having such delegate-rich states at stake on Feb. 5 could persuade candidates who might otherwise step out after a defeat in Iowa or New Hampshire to press on in hopes of a dramatic recovery on the new Super Tuesday.
''I think this is huge,'' said John Weaver, a senior adviser to Mr. McCain. ''And the unintended consequences could be even bigger.''
While officials in both parties are wary of the changes, final say over the calendar rests with the states. Advisers to Republican and Democratic presidential candidates say they have come to view substantial changes as inevitable and they have begun to plan accordingly.
''We don't set the calendar, and we don't control the calendar, but we are going to compete aggressively in all these states,'' said Patti Solis Doyle, who is the manager of Mrs. Clinton's exploratory presidential effort. ''And I will also tell you we have the resources and the organization to compete in all those states.''
The developments mark the latest upheaval in a political calendar already in disarray. The Democratic Party voted last year to allow Nevada and South Carolina to move their nominating contests into the narrow period at the beginning of the process that once was confined to just Iowa's caucus and New Hampshire's primary.
But New Hampshire officials, protective of their first-in-the-nation primary status, have responded by saying they will schedule their primary as early as it takes, even before Jan. 1, to protect its traditional role. And no one seems to know where the scramble for influence among the states will end.
''This is completely out of control,'' said William F. Galvin, the Massachusetts secretary of state. He is the leader of a National Association of Secretaries of State committee that is monitoring this movement and trying to push back against it.
''The issue has been bad,'' Mr. Galvin said. ''But it's never been as bad as it has been this year. In New Hampshire, they are going to be singing Christmas carols and voting.''
The developments suggest that the national parties are losing any control they have had over the calendar by which they will nominate presidential candidates in 2008. California, New Jersey, Florida and Illinois are most likely to move their primaries early, probably to Feb. 5, joining at least five smaller states that had already scheduled primaries for that day. Illinois lawmakers are talking about moving their primary to help Senator Barack Obama, a Democratic contender; if history is any guide, it is possible that the other candidates might decline to compete in the home state of one of their rivals.
But final votes have not been taken, and state officials said it was possible they could end up going even earlier. Florida in particular has talked about holding its primary seven days after New Hampshire's, at the risk of sanctions from the Democratic National Committee. And officials said that other states, viewing this surge to the front of the pack, could join in as well.
The Democratic National Committee had adopted a new calendar last year, reducing the once dominant influence of Iowa and New Hampshire, after years of consideration. The Republican Party has so far deferred to Democrats on the changes, waiting to see the outcome of the back-and-forth.
Democrats and Republicans said that the changes would be the latest step in the evolution of a presidential nominating system that increasingly seems resistant to the kind of dark-horse presidential bid that was possible back when small states like Iowa and New Hampshire enjoyed such influence over the nominating process.
It has sowed unease and confusion among campaign staff members as they have tried to measure its implications, and has prompted them to begin making moves now to prepare for a whole different nominating system. While conventional wisdom is that the best-known candidates would benefit, views about how the shift might play out vary among strategists.
Tad Devine, a Democratic consultant who was a senior adviser to Democratic presidential candidates in 2004 and 2000, said the calendar changes, combined with the presence on the Democratic side of three strong and well-financed candidates -- Mr. Obama, Mrs. Clinton and, probably, John Edwards, the former North Carolina senator -- could mean that the battle for the nomination drags on for months.
''I think there's a very good chance that we are going to be sitting here at the end of next March saying, 'How are people going to put together a majority of delegates with 80 percent of the delegates gone?' '' he said. ''The nominating process in 2008 is not a little different. It's fundamentally different.''
And the campaigns are adjusting accordingly.  Mr. McCain recently hired Steve Schmidt, a former Bush campaign operative who managed the re-election bid of Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, the California Republican, in no small part because of what he saw as Mr. Schmidt's command of California politics.
Similarly, Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, has turned his attention to Florida, where he sees a strong prospect of knocking out Mr. McCain by appealing to social conservatives, and installed a campaign team that includes two top political advisers to former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida. He is about to announce the hiring of more than six top aides in Florida.
Last weekend, Mr. Romney went to New Jersey, where his aides also think he could make a strong appeal.
''The focus of our efforts publicly have been in Iowa, South Carolina, Michigan, New Hampshire,'' said Kevin Madden, Mr. Romney's press secretary. ''But we are very well organized in Florida.''
In the case of Florida, Democrats and Republicans have welcomed the prospect of having to spend heavily on an early primary because that could prove an early investment for the general campaign, as well, considering how competitive that state is. That is not the case in California or New Jersey, two expensive states that have been solidly Democratic in recent presidential races.
And some Democrats disputed the notion that a California victory could help someone recover from a poor showing in the early states. Nick Baldick, a senior adviser to Mr. Edwards, noted that Howard Dean spent heavily in states that held their primaries after New Hampshire and Iowa and never recovered.
''All that mattered was momentum and winning in Iowa,'' Mr. Baldick said Wednesday. ''I would argue that more states on Feb. 5 makes that exponentially more true. That if you don't have momentum going into states like those four big states, then forget it and just go home.''
	