The tone of Air America was supposed to be as bold and belligerent as Rush Limbaugh or Sean Hannity, an unapologetically liberal riposte to the conservative radio talk shows that dominate the airwaves.
The comedian Al Franken even named his three-hour program the ''The O'Franken Report,'' to tweak his conservative nemesis, Bill O'Reilly, yet his maiden show proved to be oddly subdued and, at times, defensive.
Mr. Franken interviewed the salt-of-the-earth parents of his best friend in Minnesota to prove that liberals do not hate America, as the conservative commentator Ann Coulter has charged.
''That's unbelievable,'' Carol Griffin, 77, said of the accusation while on vacation in Florida. ''Liberals are the ones that love America. Honestly.''
There is little chance that Air America will overtake its conservative competitors any time soon. Rush Limbaugh is heard on more than 600 stations, including WABC in New York.
The Air America Radio network made its debut in five markets: New York; Chicago; Los Angeles; Portland, Ore.; and San Bernardino-Riverside, Calif.
Air America may yet grow as a radio network, but the first day mostly highlighted the difficulty of trying to match the fervor and ferocity of right-wing radio. Satire and sarcasm come more easily than rage to Mr. Franken, a former ''Saturday Night Live'' performer and writer. And rage -- unbound by reason or reticence -- is what fuels the most successful political talk shows.
Mr. Franken began his show by saying, ''Yeah, we are angry,'' but he never let loose with the kind of colorful, free-flowing rant that has proved so cathartic to like-minded listeners. (That sort of diatribe was provided later in the afternoon by the longtime liberal radio talk show host Randi Rhodes, who likened the Bushes to the Corleone family in ''The Godfather'' and said the president was Fredo.) Mr. Franken stuck instead to a middle ground of mockery and mild indignation.
The Bush administration's handling or mishandling of the war on terror after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks was the main topic on all the shows on Air America, which began at noon with Mr. Franken's show and ended with ''Majority Report, '' with the actress Janeane Garofalo and Sam Seder as hosts.
Mr. Franken's guests included Bob Kerrey, the former Democratic senator from Nebraska who is now a member of the Sept. 11 commission, the documentary filmmaker Michael Moore and, as a caller from Tennessee, former Vice President Al Gore. (''Hi, Al,'' Mr. Franken said. ''Hi, Al,'' Mr Gore replied.)
Mr. Gore's call was one of the show's highlights. Mr. Moore, who supported Ralph Nader in the 2000 election, had a few words to say to the Democratic nominee who won the popular vote but still lost the election to George W. Bush.
''We're really sorry, Al,'' Mr. Moore mumbled. Mr. Gore paused for a beat, then asked, ''For what, Michael?'' Mr. Moore then began a long, winding explanation of how he himself had not campaigned for Mr. Nader in swing states. Mr. Gore again paused, then added politely, ''What are you saying?''
For the kickoff, Mr. Franken invited some of his more famous friends to make call-in cameos; Ben Stein, a former speechwriter for President Richard M. Nixon, was one. The other was G. Gordon Liddy of Watergate fame. They did not bring great material with them.
Neither did Bob Elliott, who was the Bob of the old ''Bob & Ray Show,'' and was tapped by Mr. Franken to perform a skit about a terrorist sneaking weapons onto an airplane. In the skit, a would-be hijacker-terrorist explains that he made his dog swallow a box-cutter before takeoff, saying, ''He gets airsick, or so we hope.''
The national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, referred to as Condi, came under attack, as did Mr. Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld (Mr. Franken does a very funny impersonation of Mr. Rumsfeld). But most of Mr. Franken's ire was directed at conservative commentators, including Mr. Limbaugh and his drug problems and the outrageous statements of Ms. Coulter, whom Mr. Franken described as a ''walking horror show.'' On the show, Mr. Franken pretended to lock an irate Ms. Coulter, impersonated by the actress Bebe Neuwirth, in the green room.
And clearly, it is conservative talk radio that galls Mr. Franken the most. ''The radical right wing has taken over the White House, Congress, and increasingly, the courts,'' he complained in his introductory remarks. ''And most insidiously, the airwaves.''
Critic's Notebook  Correction:  April 3, 2004, Saturday  A Critic's Notebook article on Thursday about the premiere of the liberal radio network Air America omitted the stations on which its programs are heard. They are WLIB-AM (1190) in New York, WNTD-AM (950) in Chicago, KBLA-AM (1580) in Los Angeles, KCAA-AM (1050) in Riverside and San Bernardino, Calif., KPOJ-AM (620) in Portland, Ore., and Channel 167 on XM Satellite Radio.
Correction:  April 6, 2004, Tuesday  A Critic's Notebook article on Thursday about the premiere of the liberal radio network Air America misstated the title given to Al Franken's program, as a parody of Bill O'Reilly's television program on Fox. It is ''The O'Franken Factor,'' not ''The O'Franken Report.''
	Howard Dean went on television to atone for what he did on television.
He did so by speaking steadily and smilingly to Diane Sawyer last night on ABC's ''Primetime Thursday,'' with his arm wrapped protectively around his wife, Judith.
When Ms. Sawyer asked the candidate if his ferocious, almost maniacal concession speech in Iowa on Monday looked unpresidential, Mr. Dean replied, ''Well, I would certainly agree with that.''
From Richard M. Nixon's Checkers speech to Bill Clinton's ''60 Minutes'' interview about Gennifer Flowers, politicians have a history of going on television to quell accusations of misconduct. The interview the Deans gave on Thursday was a new kind of media brinksmanship: going on national television in a last-ditch effort to overturn what damaged him in the first place: national television.
If there is a precedent, it was in 1988, when Mr. Clinton went on ''The Tonight Show'' to make fun of himself after delivering a famously longwinded speech at the Democratic National Convention. (Delegates cheered when Mr. Clinton finally said, ''In closing.'') Back then, however, Mr. Clinton was not yet a presidential candidate and did not have much at immediate stake. Dr. Dean's predicament is far more dire.
And at times, it showed. As he began listing his faults, Dr. Dean stumbled over the words ''I wear cheap suits sometimes,'' which gave the impression he was reciting an adviser-vetted defense as he continued, ''I say things that I probably ought not to say, but I lead with my heart, and that's what I was doing right there, is leading with my heart.''
Dr. Dean said he had seen the Iowa tape only once, which if true, could make him the only person in America able to make that boast. Clips of him urging on his supporters have become the campaign equivalent of the video of Saddam Hussein's capture, a startling moment shown over and over on cable news programs and mocked mercilessly on the Internet and late-night comedy shows.
Television speeds up and amplifies political false steps, but it did not invent them. Senator Edmund S. Muskie lost his momentum and the Democratic presidential nomination in 1972 after he was reported to have grown tearful defending his wife's honor at a frigid outdoor news conference. That show of emotion undermined his image without the help of a clear television image or 24-hour cable news shows.
Dr. Dean was unabashed as he was taped watching a tape of his Iowa performance on a monitor.
''I was having a great time,'' he said almost affectionately. ''Look at me!''
Mrs. Dean looked as if she would rather not. She confessed to Ms. Sawyer that she rarely watched television and first saw the tape of her husband's speech on Wednesday.
''I thought it looked kind of silly,'' she said. ''But I thought it looked O.K.''
For others, Dr. Dean looked almost scary, bolstering inchoate worries about his self-control.
The candidate grew a bit flushed on Thursday when Ms. Sawyer confronted him with a barrage of apparent blowups, including signs of temper at his boarding school, St. George's, and he countered that she was seeking to ''make a case, as all the other campaigns would like to.''
His wife, who told Ms. Sawyer to call her Judy Dean (''I use Steinberg only in my office and the hospital''), wore a red sweater set and a friendly smile throughout the interview. She was there to attest to her husband's good temper and to address concerns about her absence from the campaign trail.
Until reporters began to write about it, Mrs. Dean stayed in Vermont, tending to her medical practice and the couple's teenage son.
The two doctors looked affectionate and comfortable with each other, and Dr. Dean kept his cool on camera, but the television interview format has lost some of its impact through overuse -- everyone from Michael Jackson to Linda Lay, wife of Kenneth L. Lay, the chief executive of the Enron Corporation, have resorted to intimate, semiconfessional television appearances when they are in trouble.
Mostly it was Mrs. Dean's unvarnished and at times impolitic candor that lent the interview a dash of sincerity.
''I love Howard, and I think he would make a terrific president,'' she said. ''And, I think if I can help him, I will. And that doesn't mean he's going to disrupt my life, disrupt my patients, my son, but if he calls on a Saturday, and I'm not on call that weekend, I'll be out there Sunday.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: TV WATCH
	There are a few shows that are sophisticated and also have a childish appeal. Even some of the most jaded television snobs look forward to the season premieres of ''The Sopranos'' or ''Curb Your Enthusiasm,'' as if those HBO shows were Christmas morning. On Fox, a new ''24'' also has the power to make grown men squeal.
And amazingly, the new season, which once again drags the special agent Jack Bauer (Kiefer Sutherland) back into the line of duty, does not disappoint. ''Sleeper Cell,'' a Showtime series about an undercover F.B.I. agent who infiltrates a Muslim terrorist cell in Los Angeles, is a spookier, subtler thriller. But ''24'' still provides an irresistible blend of iPodish computer wizardry and ''Perils of Pauline'' cliffhanger suspense.
Fox asked critics to swear a blood oath not to reveal the plot of the first 10 minutes of the four-hour premiere that will be shown in two parts on Sunday and Monday nights, and even most spoiler Web sites have shown admirable restraint. But obviously, dire things happen, leaving many lives and national security at stake. Bauer, who last season saved the nation from a cataclysmic nuclear attack and then had to fake his own death to avoid extradition to China, is the one man who can save the day, or in this case, Day 5.
This countdown clock begins ticking at 7 a.m., 18 months after the end of Day 4. (Each episode takes place over one hour of a 24-hour day that ends at the conclusion of the season.) Bauer, who is still officially dead, has assumed a new identity as Frank, an oil rig worker who lives in Mojave, Calif., with a girlfriend, Diane (Connie Britton), and her surly teenage son, Derek (Brady Corbet).
There has been considerable turnover at Bauer's old office in the Los Angeles branch of the counterterrorism unit, but fortunately, the best computer savant, Chloe (Mary Lynn Rajskub), is still hard at work in the unit, and she remains as delightfully irritable and awkward as ever. This season, she has a suitor, of sorts, yet even romance does not soften her demeanor. And she is still willing to break rules to decode and reroute all kinds of computer data to help Bauer.
Mr. Sutherland does the best he can to suggest the inner turmoil of Jack Bauer, a character who is too busy fleeing his friends and pursuing his enemies to reveal much personality. Haunted and hard-boiled, Bauer is a classic action-adventure hero: a man of few words but many tricky martial arts moves. So color on ''24'' is mainly provided by secondary characters. Unfortunately, Jack's annoying daughter, Kim (Elisha Cuthbert), is fated to make a return appearance. But at least there are a few, new enjoyable faces.
Charles Logan (Gregory Itzin) is still a Nixon-lite president of the United States -- vain, volatile and prone to panic. (He routinely lashes out at senior aides, who stare back at him with dismayed stoicism.) This time, however, the story includes his wife, Martha (Jean Smart), who appears to be mentally unstable and somewhat paranoid when off her medication -- a latter-day Martha Mitchell. The first lady suspects that a sinister plot is afoot, but her husband and his top aides keep assuring her that she is imagining things, like Ingrid Bergman in ''Gaslight.'' But they sometimes do have a point: no first lady in her right mind would wear plunging décolletage and thigh-high stockings to a summit meeting with the Russian president.
Well, maybe in a West Coast White House. ''24'' was created by Robert Cochran and Joel Surnow, both of whom worked on the hit series ''La Femme Nikita.'' Their latest endeavor has an indelible Los Angeles flair: the counterterrorism unit office looks more like the headquarters of Creative Artists Agency than the Central Intelligence Agency, and for some reason, all the villains, be they Islamic fundamentalists, drug smugglers, American oil brokers or Russian separatists, keep picking Los Angeles as a target for attack. This could be a signal that the world now views America as a superpower in show business alone, and that the epicenter of any first strike should be Hollywood. More likely, the show's creators preferred to keep location shoots close by.
It doesn't really matter; the series is not meant to be plausible, it is supposed to be cathartic -- a way of working out our worst fears of modern-day terrorism, be it bio, cyber or nuclear, in a fantasy that brings us right to the brink of destruction until one superhero prevails. It's the same scenario every season, and each one provides the same, ever-escalating brushes with catastrophe. Keeping any thriller going for 24 episodes is not an easy matter, however, and each season is over-packed with contorted plot twists, false leads and red herrings. Inevitably, there are moments when the series's creative verve starts to flag.
''24'' is a little like childbirth: by the end of each season, the process seems unbelievably long and painful, but once it is over, that is forgotten and most are ready to start all over again.
24  Fox, Sunday and Monday nights at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time.
Created by Joel Surnow and Robert Cochran; Brian Grazer, Mr. Surnow, Mr. Cochran, Howard Gordon and Evan Katz, executive producers; Kiefer Sutherland, co-executive producer. A production of Real Time Productions and Imagine Television in association with 20th Century Fox Television.
WITH: Kiefer Sutherland (Jack Bauer), Connie Britton (Diane), Brady Corbet (Derek), Gregory Itzin (President Logan), James Morrison (Bill Buchanan), Roger Cross (Curtis Manning), Louis Lombardi (Edgar Stiles), Mary Lynn Rajskub (Chloe O'Brian), Jean Smart (Martha Logan), Carlos Bernard (Tony Almeida), Kim Raver (Audrey Raines), Sean Astin (Lynn McGill) and Elisha Cuthbert (Kim).
TV WEEKEND
	''Four Kings,'' an NBC sitcom about four single straight men who share an apartment and a disinclination to grow up, sounds awful. It's not. Some of the dialogue is quite funny, and as a posse, the slacker bachelors are appealing.
That's mostly because the series was created by Max Mutchnick and David Kohan, the duo behind ''Will & Grace,'' that wicked, madcap look at urban gay life (which could be described as ''Breakfront Mountain'').
NBC hopes ''Four Kings'' will prove wicked and madcap enough about urban heterosexual life to help the network reclaim Thursday nights in a post-''Friends'' era. (The spinoff, ''Joey,'' did not make the cut.) ''Four Kings'' is better than a lot of similar sitcoms, but it's not different enough to stand out in what NBC hopes will be a renaissance of must-see television. The writing is not as clever and high-flown as that of ''Will & Grace,'' and the premise is far more conventional than those of the two new sitcoms that follow, ''My Name Is Earl'' and ''The Office.''
In its eighth season, ''Will & Grace'' is still funny, but it is on its last legs. ''Four Kings'' is an experiment, a chance to see whether the kind of traditional network sitcom made with four cameras and a laugh track can still attract the younger, sophisticated viewers NBC once owned and operated.
There are no laugh tracks, musical cues or cute punch lines on either ''Earl'' or ''The Office.'' The style and sensibility of both are distinctive and closer to HBO than to network television. And both move away from urban sophistication to less familiar territory. Jason Lee plays Earl, a backwoods derelict who has an epiphany and decides to improve his karma by undoing past wrongs. It's satire, but softhearted. Mr. Lee is charming, and in Earl's beer-and-trailer-park world, friends, relatives, neighbors and other delinquents form the kind of ersatz extended family that made shows like ''Seinfeld'' and ''Frasier'' such hits.
''The Office,'' an Americanized version of Ricky Gervais's BBC series, is more pitiless: a mock documentary that is a deadpan parody of workplace mediocrity and tedium. NBC has not always had much luck with knockoffs, but this one works. Steve Carell, who plays Michael, the astoundingly obnoxious, self-deluded boss, has made the character his own, and he is surrounded by a cast of brilliantly awful co-workers who become endearing, but only after a while. For those many viewers who did not see the original on BBC America, the Carell version may seem astonishingly bold.
''Four Kings'' cannot make the same boast. It's easily summed up as a ''Sex and the City'' for men, or a girl-free ''Friends.'' Sweet-natured Ben (Josh Cooke) inherits his grandmother's vast New York apartment and invites his three oldest and best friends to move in with him -- even though he loses his gorgeous girlfriend in the deal. Ben figures that this is their last chance to be together and backslide.
''Soon life is going to be about marriages, careers and rehab,'' he explains. ''Let's do this while we still can.''
Jason (Todd Grinnell) is a former fat kid turned businessman who works out compulsively and also climbs a corporate ladder. Bobby (Shane McRae) is a sweet, dim pothead who will eat anything for a dollar but charges an extra 50 cents ''if it's not food.'' Seth Green, who played Dr. Evil's churlish son in the Austin Powers movies, is Barry, a smart underachiever who is short, paranoid and bitter, particularly about Ben's charmed life.
The series begins with a flashback to the apartment kitchen when the boys were in elementary school and Ben's grandma fed and nagged them. When she sees Barry holding her silver flask, she demands her perfume bottle back. Barry, already a prematurely angry, needling child, retorts that it's not perfume, it's liquor. ''It's perfume for my heart,'' she explains loftily.
Their adult predicaments are classic sitcom plotlines. Barry has to baby-sit for his ex-girlfriend's rude, spoiled twins. Ben gets an assignment from Maxim magazine to write about whither the one-night stand and takes his buddies to a hot club frequented by actresses and models. They are wonderstruck. ''There are, like, two girls for every girl,'' Bobby says.
''Four Kings'' is not misogynistic like ''Two and a Half Men'' on CBS, nor is it as predictable as the mercifully canceled distaff version on ABC, ''Hot Properties.'' The series has grace notes and some wit, but it is also the kind of sitcom that NBC audiences seem to have outgrown. The network must be hoping that viewers will regress right along with the show's characters.
Four Kings  NBC, tonight at 8:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 7:30, Central time.
Directed by James Burrows (pilot); David Kohan and Max Mutchnick, creators and executive producers; Tim Kaiser, producer; Bruce Alden, associate producer. A KoMut Entertainment and Warner Brothers Television production.
WITH: Seth Green (Barry), Josh Cooke (Ben), Todd Grinnell (Jason) and Shane McRae (Bobby).
TELEVISION REVIEW
	It sometimes seems as though Donald Trump is to business what the Venetian Resort in Las Vegas is to Venice -- a fun, cheesy caricature of the real thing.
One would not necessarily want the real estate developer known as the Donald to represent American capitalism, but he is perfectly cast as the hammy boss on NBC's rat-race reality show, ''The Apprentice.''
The premise, for anyone who has missed the blaring promos on television and in movie theaters, is urban ''Survivor'' -- 16 young would-be entrepreneurs compete at an array of business tasks (the first assignment is to sell lemonade on the street). The last one standing will become president of one of Mr. Trump's companies for a year. Each week, one aspirant is eliminated -- not voted off by his rivals, as is the case on other shows, but by Mr. Trump, who presses the losers to turn on their weakest link before delivering judgment (''You're fired!'').
January is crammed with fresh contortions on the reality genre, from Fox's ''My Big Fat Obnoxious Fiancé'' (a woman has to pass off a horrible boor as the love of her life to family and friends) to ''Can You Be a Pornstar?'' a self-explanatory reality show on adult pay-per-view cable channels. But ''The Apprentice'' stands out as one that takes a modest twist on the ''Survivor'' formula -- from jungle to urban jungle -- and improves on it.
There is more to ''The Apprentice'' than just the spectacle of Type A contestants making fools of themselves or the irresistible braggadocio and banality of Mr. Trump. (''New York,'' he says in a typical voice-over narration. ''It can chew you up and spit you out.'').
There are some intriguing glimpses of reality behind the television reality.
As on any of these shows, clichés and stereotypes are tweaked and teased for the camera: Jessie, 21, the chiropractor/real estate agent from Wisconsin, delivers her biography posed next to bales of hay. Ereka, 27, the marketing manager who grew up in New York, shows off her big-city smarts by showing up the first day at work at the Trump headquarters in a strapless top.
The women are teamed against the men, who run a gamut from Kwame, 29, an African-American Wall Street investment manager with an M.B.A. from Harvard, to Troy, 32, who never went to college and is a mortgage lender/real estate developer in Idaho. As was the case when men were pitted against women in ''Survivor: The Amazon'' (Mark Burnett, the creator of ''Survivor,'' is the executive producer of ''The Apprentice''), the men start out like Eagle Scouts, calmly setting goals and divvying up chores, while the women debate, bicker and even cry -- at times, they fall back on feminine wiles to get ahead.
Yet in between those stock tableaus are smaller, truer life lessons: early in the first episode, each team has to select a name. The women, hardwired to listen and to please, come up with the Protégé Corporation. The men, missing even Mr. Trump's most glaring cues for flattery, call themselves the Versa Corporation.
''That's a pretty interesting choice,'' Mr. Trump mutters with complete uninterest.
When the teams are summoned to the New York Stock Exchange, it is the men who fret over what to wear. ''It would not be inappropriate to wear a tie,'' David, 31, a doctor/venture capitalist, suggests gravely.
A personality clash between Ereka and Omarosa, 29, a political consultant/pageant coach and the only African-American woman competing on the show, festers into a racial standoff in the second episode. Those are the ragged, unpleasant frictions that made reality shows like MTV's ''Real World'' and CBS's ''Survivor'' so popular in the first place; they have been airbrushed out of the more contrived dating shows like ''The Bachelor.''
In the through-the-looking-glass morality of reality shows, the quest for money is more honorable than the pursuit of love, which as almost every variation on ''The Bachelor'' has shown, is actually a grab for fame and fortune dressed up as romance. Viewers may doubt the sincerity of Larissa on ''Average Joe Hawaii,'' but it is hard to question Omorosa's determination to finish first.
And for once, the players' personalities are not revealed by how well they balance a tiki torch or pitch woo in a hot-air balloon. Each week, the teams are thrown into into real work places -- next week, they compete to come up with the best advertising campaign for a company marketing corporate jet service. (Viewers may be surprised to learn that even top New York advertising executives still say things like ''Think outside the box.'' )
Mostly, ''The Apprentice,'' is about career voyeurism -- the kind of fantasy fulfillment that George Plimpton used to indulge in by playing quarterback with the Detroit Lions or filling in for the percussionist of the New York Philharmonic.
And then of course, there is Mr. Trump, sweeping in and out in his black Trump helicopter like Glinda the Rich Witch. Perhaps not surprisingly from a man whose biography on the show's Web site is longer than those of Frankin D. Roosevelt and Bill Gates combined, a top reward for a job well done was a peek at his private penthouse apartment.
The best that one can say for that opulent sprawl of pink marble, gold and crystal is that it does indeed reflect its owner's taste. And there was something wonderfully ambivalent in the stunned reaction of one contestant. ''You have to want those things, you have to aspire to those things,'' the would-be apprentice said pensively, ''if you want to be like Trump.''
THE APPRENTICE
NBC, tonight at 8:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 7:30, Central time. Subsequent episodes on Wednesday nights at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time.
Mark Burnett and Donald Trump, executive producers; Conrad Riggs, producer. Produced by Mark Burnett Productions in association with Trump Productions LLC.
TELEVISION REVIEW
Correction:  March 25, 2006, Saturday  An article in The Arts on March 13 about Tony DiSanto, executive vice president for series development and animation at MTV Networks, misstated the role of Mark Burnett, one of the ''reality auteurs'' to whom a media professor compared him. (Similar errors occurred in more than a dozen earlier articles, dating to July 2001.) Mr. Burnett is an executive producer of ''Survivor,'' not the creator. Charlie Parsons, another executive producer of ''Survivor,'' created the format, initially for a Swedish show, on which it is based.
	For a while, it seemed as if Roller Derby was a lost art, like illuminated manuscripts or clog dancing. Actually, it's more like polio: many people assume it was eradicated in the 1970's, but it's still around and, in some areas, quite virulent.
''Rollergirls,'' a documentary-style reality series about Texas Roller Derby that has its premiere tonight on A&E, is proof that the spectacle sport never went away entirely; it just drew less attention. There was a reason interest faded, and ''Rollergirls'' is also proof of that.
There is something creepily fascinating -- and sometimes poignant -- about the women who devote themselves to this campy, feline version of pro wrestling. They do have, after all, tattoos, slutty costumes and stage names like Jailbait and Gun Smoka LaLoca. It's just not enough to fill 13 episodes. One or two episodes could easily do justice to the sport's struggle for recognition and its players' quest for empowerment and self-esteem.
And that could be the one surprise in the series: that women who work as nurses and teachers are somehow most proud of themselves when they put on roller skates, helmets and vinyl corsets and punch the daylights out of one another. As Adam, a gay friend of Punky Bruiser, said to a friend as he watched her practice with her teammates, ''It's so trippy that someone would want to do this as a hobby or whatever.'' Only most of them do not view Roller Derby as a hobby. It is their vocation, and they want to make it a professional sport.
It could be argued that other reality shows devote just as much time and attention to even less worthwhile subjects. The heroines of reality shows like ''The Bachelorette'' and ''The Swan'' can't even roller-skate, and millions of viewers tune in to see them make fools of themselves. But those kinds of shows are the opposite of this A&E series. Reality contests take ordinary, identifiable women and pose them in an absurd, artificial fantasy fishbowl. ''Rollergirls'' is a documentary that takes women who pursue an absurd, artificial fantasy sport and tries to pose them as ordinary, identifiable women.
''Rollergirls'' takes heroic steps to go beyond the silliness and try to understand and ennoble players, but the subject is just not worth so much effort.
Roller Derby was a national television rage in the 1950's, and matches filled Madison Square Garden and other arenas as late as the mid-1970's. The basics of the game -- rival ''jammers'' break out of a pack of 10 skaters and sprint around a 100-foot banked track, trying to shove past as many opponents as possible while teammates try to upend rival blockers -- were first suggested in the 1930's by Damon Runyon. But these days, players are not so much Runyonesque as Bob Guccione-ish.
The first episode focuses on a rookie, a stolid, fresh-faced young woman who takes the name Venis Envy to join a team called the Putas del Fuego (Whores of Fire). She explains in a voice-over that Roller Derby has always been her dream (''It's what I think about every day''), and she wants her mother to approve of her new pursuit. We watch as she improves her skills and bonds with her teammates. And that mainly involves a lot of drinking -- with the occasional stop to toilet-paper another player's house or urinate in a dark alley. These players are all based in Austin, Tex., which is supposed to be Texas's classy town. One can only imagine Rollergirls' Night Out in Fort Worth.
Roller Derby is kitschy, but the players take it and themselves very seriously. The women discuss how much they value their friendships, and they exult in their own physical strength, playfulness and high jinks. But the girl-power thing palls quickly; every clique -- water polo players, scrapbook aficionados -- thinks its members are really, really fun and special. To outsiders, the Rollergirls on the town mostly look like just another boozy office outing to a Chippendales show.
There are some intriguing snatches of drunken dialogue, however. In a rented limousine on the way to some late-night bars, Lux explains another player's absence by saying, very earnestly, ''She had some family issues to deal with, and she also messed up her foot at the Jell-O wrestling.''
A&E wants to show a more serious, human side of a clownish sport and does a good job of letting the women speak for themselves. But at the end of the day, it is still Roller Derby. One team, whose players dress up like Roman Catholic schoolgirls in plaid miniskirts and tight white T-shirts, is called the Holy Rollers. ''That's like a hot, they'll be all turned on, straight guys,'' Adam, the other gay friend, told his companion. ''The girls wear short skirts and punch each other in the face.''
Rollergirls  A&E, tonight at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.
Gary Auerbach and Julie Auerbach, creators and executive producers; Nancy Dubuc, executive producer for A&E; Colleen Conway, supervising producer for A&E; Tina Gazzerro, Matt Hovis and Karen Jacobs, co-executive producers. Produced for A&E Network by Go Go Luckey Productions.
TELEVISION REVIEW
Correction:  February 3, 2006, Friday  A television review on Jan. 2 about ''Rollergirls,'' a documentary-style reality series on A&E, misidentified the player who explained another player's absence by saying, ''She had some family issues to deal with, and she also messed up her foot at the Jell-O wrestling.'' It was Cha Cha, not Lux.
	