The Democratic presidential candidates repeatedly pummeled Howard Dean at a debate here on Sunday, in a raucous series of exchanges on taxes and trade that reflected how tight the Iowa caucuses have become 15 days before the vote.
For two hours, during a blustery afternoon snowstorm, seven of the nine contenders took advantage of what is likely to be one of the most prominent platforms left before the Jan. 19 caucuses. They promoted themselves, laid out the themes of their campaigns and attacked their opponents, underscoring the pivotal nature of the contest.
The debate also highlighted an emerging subplot here: the fight for No. 2 -- or, in the tradition of Iowa caucuses, with their wide field and first position on the calendar, No. 3.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, a low-voltage presence in past debates, repeatedly took on Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri. The two clashed in particular over the depth of their opposition to free trade treaties, an issue that Mr. Gephardt has made a centerpiece of his appeal in a state where there is strong opposition among Democrats to pacts like the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Still, the candidate of the day was, once again, Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont. When the candidates were offered an opportunity to question one another, four turned their fire on Dr. Dean, leaving no doubt about the pressure they feel to block him from a victory here that could propel him to his party's nomination.
''My question, not surprisingly, is to Howard Dean,'' said Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut. Mr. Lieberman noted that Dr. Dean had declined to release all public papers from when he was governor, and pressed him to settle the issue here, before the cameras at a television studio on the outskirts of Des Moines.
''The people of America, who are judging your candidacy for president now, have a right to know what you did as governor to determine whether you're suitable and capable of being president of the United States,''' Mr. Lieberman said. ''I have in my hand the memorandum of understanding between you and the secretary of state, which makes very clear that all it takes to open up your records, Mr. Governor, is one stroke of a pen.''
But Dr. Dean brushed aside the entreaty from across the stage (he was too far away for Mr. Lieberman to walk over). He said a Vermont court would decide the question, which he defined as protecting the privacy of individuals who had written him. In particular, he cited Vermonters involved in the dispute over his signing of legislation allowing same-sex civil unions.
''Governors seal records for particular amounts of time -- in my case, some of the records -- to protect people's privacy, to protect the privacy that was given to advisers,'' Dr. Dean said.
''That is an unsatisfactory and disappointing answer,'' Mr. Lieberman responded. ''Why should you have to force a judge to force you to do what you know is right?''
A moment later, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts cited a series of pronouncements on foreign and domestic policy that Dr. Dean has made and then backed away from as evidence of Dr. Dean's potential weakness as a Democratic candidate, or as a president.
''When you were asked by The Concord Monitor about Osama bin Laden, you said you couldn't prejudge his guilt for September 11th,'' Mr. Kerry said, scrunching up his face and turning incredulously to Dr. Dean. ''What in the world were you thinking?''
Dr. Dean responded by citing the primacy of law.
''As an American, I want to see Osama bin Laden get what he deserves, which is the death penalty,'' Dr. Dean responded. ''But I was asked that question as a candidate for president of the United States. And a candidate for president of the United States is obligated to stand for the rule of law.''
The debate here, sponsored by The Des Moines Register and Iowa Public Television, marked the start of what all the campaigns view as the final and most intense phase of the contest in Iowa.
Even so, two of the Democratic candidates skipped the event: Gen. Wesley K. Clark and the Rev. Al Sharpton, neither of whom has been campaigning here.
Mr. Lieberman also made a decision to skip the caucuses. But he flew in specifically for this debate, and to seize the opportunity to present himself to an audience outside Iowa as the Democrat willing to make the strongest challenge to Dr. Dean.
In the face of the attacks, Dr. Dean showed little sign of backing down. Refusing to assent to a call by Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio to agree to withdraw the troops in Iraq, he asserted that President Bush had made Iraq more dangerous.
''The president has created a national security danger in Iraq when none existed before,'' Dr. Dean said. None of his opponents challenged him on that statement.
And he reasserted, in the face of warnings by Democrats that the remark displayed naïveté about foreign policy, that the capture of Saddam Hussein had not improved safety for Americans at home.
Dr. Dean called Mr. Hussein ''a dreadful person,'' adding, ''I am delighted to see him behind bars, and I hope he gets what he deserves.'' But, he added: ''The fact is that since Saddam Hussein has been caught we've lost 23 additional troops. We now have for the first time American fighter jets escorting commercial airliners through American airspace.''
The candidates covered a vast amount of policy ground, for the most part restating what have become familiar positions after more than 25 debates. But some new avenues of discussion emerged.
Mr. Gephardt used the debate to remind voters of his vigorous opposition to free trade.
''Everybody up here, except Dennis, voted for Nafta and voted for the China agreement,'' he said. ''They did the wrong thing. I don't think we can win this race against George Bush with a trade policy that's exactly like George Bush's. I'm the only one who has led on this issue for over 20 years, and let me tell you what I think we need to do.''
Mr. Edwards, who has become increasingly vocal in opposing trade treaties, took issue with Mr. Gephardt's characterization, noting that he had not even been in Congress when Nafta was passed, and that he had opposed it.
''I think it is really important, as we go forward in this debate -- and we have a long time left -- that we be completely accurate and straightforward and honest with Iowa's caucusgoers about where we stand,'' he said sternly to Mr. Gephardt.
Mr. Gephardt responded, ''Well, John, you weren't in Congress when Nafta came up, so you couldn't vote, but you voted for the China ----'' before Mr. Edwards cut him off.
Mr. Edwards said, ''But you said I voted for it.'' Mr. Gephardt said, ''I understand.''
As Mr. Gephardt appeared to redden a bit, Mr. Edwards said, ''You understand?''
Mr. Gephardt responded: ''I'm quite willing to say that you weren't there, and you didn't vote for it. But you voted for the China agreement, and it's had a bad impact here in Iowa.''
The candidates also clashed over how much Mr. Bush's tax cut should be reinstated. Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt have called for rolling back all the tax cuts, and Dr. Dean disputed the suggestion by Mr. Edwards, Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Kerry that the middle-class tax cut included in the Bush plan was significant.
''Middle-class people did not see a tax cut,'' he said. ''There was no middle-class tax cut. It was a Bush tax increase with tuitions, with property taxes, with health care.''
Suddenly, and finally, Dr. Dean found a rare and unlikely ally as he talked against the Bush tax plan.
''I agree with Howard on this,'' Mr. Gephardt said. ''I think we have got to offer a real choice, if we are going to beat George Bush. I'm ready to say to the people of the country, if you like the Bush tax cuts, vote for Bush. But if you want health care that can never be taken away from you, vote for me.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE DEBATE
	Senators John Edwards and John Kerry leveled a last-minute round of charges about each other's credentials on Monday, as Democrats marched toward a round of contests in seven states that party leaders said could transform the nomination battle by forcing some candidates out of the race.
The exchanges between Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry, conducted in the course of a day crammed with rallies, bus and jet rides, and telephone calls to supporters, reflected the significance of Tuesday's votes.
Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, who has said he must win South Carolina to keep his candidacy viable, broke his self-imposed vow of political civility on Monday, criticizing Mr. Kerry for supporting trade treaties that are highly unpopular here and for accepting contributions from lobbyists.
''We want someone who hasn't been there for 15 to 20 years, if you're going to bring change,'' Mr. Edwards told reporters here, referring to Mr. Kerry's service in the Senate. He added: ''I don't take contributions from lobbyists. He obviously does.''
Mr. Kerry, speaking with a Columbia, S.C., television station via satellite from Albuquerque, suggested that Mr. Edwards, who has spent five years in the Senate, did not have the experience to take on President Bush or to lead the nation in perilous times.
''This is not a time for on-the-job training in the White House for national security issues,'' Mr. Kerry said. A moment later, after the interview was over, in an aside that his aides insisted had not been intended for public consumption, Mr. Kerry mocked Mr. Edwards's claim that he was the strongest Democrat the party could put up against Mr. Bush because he was from the South.
''Edwards says he's the only one who can win states in the South,'' Mr. Kerry said to a senior aide, David Wade, in a remark that was picked up by a reporter's microphone. ''He can't win his own state.''
Even as he batted at Mr. Edwards, Mr. Kerry turned an eye to the general election, saying he had not made up his mind about whether to follow up attacks made by senior Democrats challenging Mr. Bush's record of attendance in the Air National Guard. On Sunday, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Terry McAuliffe, accused Mr. Bush of being AWOL, a reference to questions about whether Mr. Bush showed up at required drills in his final months of service.
Tuesday's contests, with 269 delegates at stake, stretch from Delaware to the Great Plains and the Southwest. But the day is particularly pivotal for Mr. Edwards, who is looking to a win here to keep his campaign going, and to Mr. Kerry, whose aides view Mr. Edwards as the biggest obstacle to a sweep of the contests Tuesday night that they said could almost guarantee him the nomination.
At one point on Monday, Mr. Edwards's chief spokesman, Jennifer Palmieri, disputed the suggestion that Mr. Edwards appeared to be abandoning his vow not to criticize his opponent.
''He's not going on the attack,'' Ms. Palmieri said. ''How is that an attack? It's not an attack. It's an important distinction for him. He does not take money from registered lobbyists.''
Mr. Edwards was criticizing Mr. Kerry for voting for the Nafta trade agreement, a pact that Mr. Edwards said he would have opposed had he been in the Senate, and for accepting contributions from lobbyists. Mr. Edwards has accepted contributions from former lobbyists, Ms. Palmieri said, but not current ones. His campaign manager is a former lobbyist.
Mr. Edwards is not the only Democrat whose political future may be riding on Tuesday's voting, -- with contests in Arizona, Delaware, Missouri, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma and South Carolina.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark is looking for a win in Oklahoma, after all but abandoning his effort here, and Democrats said that General Clark appeared to be in a strong position to win in that state, which has 40 delegates.
''I am one tough hombre, and I can stand against George W. Bush, and we will take him down,'' General Clark told a tiny audience of voters in a stop in New Mexico on Monday, using some of the more bellicose language of the day, and displaying his campaign's attempts to draw support from Hispanic voters.
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut was looking for a win in Delaware, though Democrats said that Mr. Kerry appeared to be in a strong position there, too.
General Clark, Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Edwards are all certain to face intense pressure to step aside on Wednesday if they fail to win a single state. An effort to clear the field is already being orchestrated by Mr. McAuliffe, who has been pushing for the party to rally around a nominee as soon as possible, to present a strong challenge to Mr. Bush.
''Our nominee could be closer at hand than we had ever imagined,'' said May Scheve, the Missouri Democratic leader.
The biggest obstacles to a Kerry sweep on Tuesday are Mr. Edwards here in South Carolina and General Clark in Oklahoma. Democrats described Mr. Kerry as being in a strong position in Missouri -- which has the most delegates, 74, at stake that night -- North Dakota, Arizona, Delaware and in New Mexico.
In New Mexico on Monday, Gov. Bill Richardson, a Democrat, turned up alongside Mr. Kerry. He climbed the stage, joined hands with Mr. Kerry for a victory pump into the air, and jumped down afterwards. A moment later, Mr. Richardson told reporters that he considered Mr. Kerry ''virtually unstoppable'' in New Mexico.
The events on Monday served to dramatize the extent of the collapse, at least for now, of Dr. Dean's campaign. Just three weeks ago, he had looked to Tuesday as the day when he would effectively seize the nomination by sweeping to victory in most of the states. Now, nearly out of money, Dr. Dean has no television advertisements running in any of the states, though he has campaigned in Arizona and New Mexico, in hopes of at least winning some delegates there.
He told reporters aboard his campaign plane that he expected to do best in New Mexico. Asked about his reversal of fortunes, he responded, ''It's just the same as it was a year ago: just put one foot in front of the other and keep going.''
And he also attacked Mr. Kerry's candidacy, saying he thought the senator would be a weak contender in the general election.
''He's going to have a hard time if he's the nominee,'' Dr. Dean said. ''I think electability's a real issue for him. He appears to change his mind so often.''
Dr. Dean went on to assert that Mr. Kerry's ''credibility is under enormous attack, repeatedly,'' citing his votes in favor of the use of force in Iraq and of President Bush's education plan.
''He has this pattern,'' Dr. Dean said, ''you saw it with No Child Left Behind, you saw it with the war, you see it with special interests, which I think is terribly damaging. It appears that his word is no good.''
Mr. Edwards was not the only one campaigning furiously through South Carolina. The Rev. Al Sharpton conducted his own bus trip, starting on Monday morning at the site of a 19th century slave market. Mr. Sharpton, the only black candidate remaining in the race, has long argued that he will do well in a primary where as much as 50 percent of the electorate is African-American.
In his appearance, Mr. Sharpton vowed that he would not run as an independent candidate if he lost his party's nomination. Dr. Dean made a similar pledge on Monday.
In a late move, South Carolina election officials dropped a requirement for voters to sign an oath binding them to the Democratic Party in order to vote in the primary. The move was expected to increase turnout by independents and perhaps Republicans, which some strategists said could help Mr. Edwards.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
	The Democratic presidential nomination battle turned into a two-man contest on Tuesday as Senator John Kerry narrowly defeated Senator John Edwards in the Wisconsin primary. Howard Dean suffered a dismal third-place showing that Democrats said would effectively end his campaign.
The finish by Mr. Edwards startled Democrats here, as well as those in the Kerry and Edwards camps, who had been looking for Mr. Kerry to post another decisive victory in Wisconsin, based on his performance so far this year.
And it set the stage for what Mr. Edwards said he had long wanted after trying to break through what was once a crowded field: a clean two-way race with Mr. Kerry, played out over a relatively long period, until the next big primary day, March 2.
''The people of Wisconsin spoke loudly and clearly tonight,'' Mr. Edwards said in a jubilant speech to supporters. ''They want a debate. They want this campaign to continue.''
Mr. Kerry, who stepped out to give his victory speech as Mr. Edwards was speaking, knocking him off live television, made no mention of the thin margin.
''The motto of the state of Wisconsin is 'Forward','' Mr. Kerry said. ''And I want to thank the state of Wisconsin for moving this cause and this campaign forward tonight here in this great state.''
At 11:25 p.m., with 99 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Kerry had 326,299 votes, or 40 percent, and Mr. Edwards had 282,581, or 34 percent. Dr. Dean received 150,180 votes (18 percent), while Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio had 27,139 (3 percent), and the Rev. Al Sharpton gained 14,434 votes (2 percent).
Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, said even before the polls closed that he would continue his campaign no matter what the outcome in Wisconsin, a state he once said he had to win.
''We are not done,'' he said in his speech on Tuesday.
But leading Democrats said that in light of his latest disappointing loss, they saw little hope for his continuing as a serious candidate. And while Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards turned their attention to March 2, when there will be 10 contests, Dr. Dean prepared to head back to his home in Burlington to determine where to take his campaign from here.
A critical question now, some Democrats said, is whether Dr. Dean, who has not won a single contest, withdraws from the race and throws his support to Mr. Edwards or Mr. Kerry. A survey of voters leaving the polls found that those who said they had once intended to support Dr. Dean split evenly between Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry.
Mr. Edwards's strong showing came in a state with a maverick tradition, going back to when John F. Kennedy upset Hubert H. Humphrey in the 1960 Democratic presidential primary. It also came in a state where any registered voter may participate in the Democratic primary, and 40 percent of those who voted on Tuesday said they were not Democrats.
As in Iowa, Mr. Edwards appears to have gained strength in the final days of the campaign, in what many Democrats said was a testament to strong campaign skills. He won the endorsement of two of the state's major newspapers. And not incidentally, several Democrats said, he might have benefited from what had been Dr. Dean's central message, as he urged voters here not to rubber-stamp the Kerry nomination, and allow the process to continue.
''Everyone I talk to, conservatives and liberals, say we want to keep it going at least until sometime in March,'' said Mary Citizen, 59, who lives in West Bend, Wis., and was waving a flag at Dr. Dean's election-night party in a Madison hotel. ''Every time these guys get up on a stage they're throwing ideas at us. We're still shopping. It's not a done deal.''
Mr. Edwards's aides expressed confidence that the jolt of excitement that would accompany his showing would bring him enough favorable publicity to help compensate for any financial advantage Mr. Kerry might have. They argued that this two-week period would allow Mr. Edwards to capitalize on what his aides have long argued are misgivings among Democrats about Mr. Kerry, and give voters more time to get acquainted with Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards won the support of 50 percent of the Democrats who said they made up their minds over the last three days, according to the survey of voters leaving the polls. And should the race go on until March 9, Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, will be competing with Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, in four Southern states.
''We've been saying all along that voters are still looking for a choice,'' said David Ginsberg, Mr. Edwards's communications director. ''It's a pretty good thing to have a candidate that the more they see him, the more they like him.''
Mr. Kerry's advisers noted that Mr. Edwards had so far won only in the state of his birth, South Carolina, and expressed doubt that he could catch up. Before Tuesday, party leaders from across the nation had been urging Democrats to coalesce around Mr. Kerry as the party's likely nominee.
Mr. Kerry's victory here was apparently his narrowest yet; still, he has now won in 15 of the 17 states where there have been contests, in many cases by double-digit margins. He has displayed strength in all voters groups.
''I know this was closer than he thought, but to go from state to state, win for win, I just think that is a good thing for Senator Kerry,'' Gov. James E. Doyle of Wisconsin, a Democrat who has not endorsed a candidate, said in an interview. ''That's a tremendous kind of momentum.''
Still, the developments here on Tuesday signaled that a race that many Democrats had seen as all but over would roll on -- at least into March. And while Mr. Kerry would appear in some ways to have a lopsided advantage over Mr. Edwards -- before Tuesday, he had 448 delegates compared with 161 for Mr. Edwards -- the result in Wisconsin, a swing state in a general election, seems certain to raise questions about the central claim of Mr. Kerry's campaign: that he is the strongest Democrat the party has to send up against President Bush.
Mr. Edwards's showing came as a surprise both because Mr. Kerry had swamped him in state after state and because a series of pre-primary polls showed Mr. Kerry with a large lead. Because of the open primary, Wisconsin is a difficult state to poll.
Still, the practical result was that anything less than a substantial victory by Mr. Kerry could be portrayed by his opponents as a setback, which is what was happening throughout the day as the campaigns got early glimpses of the results of surveys of voters leaving the polls.
Mr. Edwards suggested in an interview this week that Mr. Kerry's run of victories was a function of his riding the wave of support created by victories in Iowa and New Hampshire, and that his standing would erode under the scrutiny of Democratic voters. He argued that he tended to grow in strength the more time he spent in a state.
That said, Democrats contended that Mr. Edwards urgently needed to begin winning. Tuesday's contest was the sixth in which he placed second; he has come in fourth seven times.
And Mr. Kerry's advisers scoffed at the notion that Mr. Edwards had a legitimate claim on being part of two-man contest.
''I don't see this as a two-person race because we're running against someone who has won one state,'' a senior Kerry adviser said. ''This whole idea that you sort of cherry-pick the states you are going to compete in -- that's a vanity game, it's not a real game.''
Mr. Kerry said Tuesday, before the polls closed, that he would campaign aggressively across the nation. ''I'm not selectively picking one state or another to wage my campaign in,'' he said. ''I'm waging my campaign all across the country in all states.''
The survey of voters leaving the polls found that in Wisconsin, as almost everywhere else this year, voters were looking for a strong challenger to Mr. Bush.
Mr. Kerry did best with those for whom electability was most important -- getting 70 percent of their support. Mr. Edwards drew the support of about 45 percent of those who said caring was the most important quality.
The survey of voters leaving the polling places was conducted by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International for the television networks and The Associated Press.
In Madison on Tuesday, Mary Crave, 47, an adult education teacher, said she voted for Mr. Kerry.
''He's the most electable,'' Ms. Crave said. ''I like Edwards, but I don't think he's ready yet to gather the troops. I'm sort of an anybody-but-Bush voter.''
Steven Kleiss, 36, a banker, said he voted for Mr. Edwards.
''He stayed the most consistent throughout the debates and the race,'' Mr. Kleiss said. ''It seems like the other candidates have shifted based on what's popular, but he stayed on message better.''
How the Poll Was Conducted
The poll was based on questionnaires completed by voters on Tuesday as they left voting places throughout Wisconsin.
It was conducted by Edison Media Research of Somerville, N.J., and Mitofsky International of New York City for the National Election Pool, a consortium of ABC News, Associated Press, CBS News, CNN, Fox News, and NBC News.
The results are based on 2,238 voters in 40 randomly selected precincts across Wisconsin.
In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results from such polls should differ by no more than plus or minus three percentage points from what would have been obtained by seeking to interview all voters in the Wisconsin Democratic primary.
Results based on smaller subgroups have a larger potential sampling error. In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of voter opinion on an election day, like the reluctance of some people to take time to fill out the questionnaire, may introduce other sources of error.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
	