Chuck the groundhog waddled out of his open carrier and onto the desk in the tiny reception office in the Staten Island Zoo. He walked onto the phone and stepped on a few buttons. A house line rang. ''Thank you for calling the Staten Island Zoo,'' the female voice said on the speaker. ''You have reached the director's office.''
Chuck left no message, or rather, he left a long, blank message, which is typical Chuck. It was just after 4 on Thursday last week, and Chuck was waiting to clock out and catch the bus.
Every weekend, Chuck, a strapping young hog born in April, goes home with his trainer, Douglas Schwartz, who works Sundays to Thursdays. This allows him to spend as much time with Mr. Schwartz as possible, and on the hourlong trip on public transit (Mr. Schwartz doesn't drive), to get used to the prying eyes of strangers.
The hope is that when he makes his big debut next month he will not bite Regis in the face, or leave something unfortunate on Diane Sawyer's desk, or, worst of all, see his shadow in the klieg lights and shrink back into his pet carrier for six weeks. ''On Groundhog Day itself,'' Mr. Schwartz said, ''the limo just appears and whizzes us off to wherever. He has to always be on point.''
Chuck doesn't get much chance to interact with the public during the week. He lives in a big cage in the zoo's basement, which Mr. Schwartz says is fine with Chuck but which seems like a waste of the zoo's sole marquee resident. ''I'd like him to have his own exhibit, but it becomes a money thing,'' said Mr. Schwartz, the zookeeper in charge of the zoo's tropical rainforest. '' 'Do you want reindeer, or does Chuck get an exhibit?' 'Well, we want reindeer.' Reindeer are a very popular attraction with kids these days.''
The clock struck 5. Mr. Schwartz, Chuck and the other working stiffs filed out into the fading winter light. The S53 bus came lumbering, somewhat groundhog-like, down Broadway. Usually, Mr. Schwartz said, the driver makes an announcement along the lines of, ''Ladies and gentlemen, Chuck has boarded the bus.'' On this day, though, he just made small talk with Mr. Schwartz.
''Seems quiet,'' the driver said.
''Yeah, he's sleeping today,'' Mr. Schwartz replied. Inside the carrier, Chuck lay on his back, paws on chest, buck teeth smiling blissfully.
A middle-aged woman sat beside Chuck and began shoveling Oreos into her mouth as she stole glances at the carrier with ''Ground Hog'' written in Magic Marker on the front. Chuck slept through. The woman got off, and an older woman replaced her. She peeked in.
''Oh, the cat's sleeping,'' she said.
''No, it's a groundhog,'' Mr. Schwartz said. The woman scowled and turned away.
''One time someone on the bus called the zoo and complained that he smelled terrible, and I had to stop doing it for a year,'' Mr. Schwartz recalled. ''Then we got a new director who said go ahead and do it, and the guy called again, and the director told him where he could stick his opinion.''
This Chuck is the sixth groundhog Mr. Schwartz has trained for the role since 1995 -- his predecessor died last spring. Because he was born in captivity (in a zoo in New Jersey), he has been relatively easy to socialize -- relatively being the key word.
''The patience involved is staggering,'' Mr. Schwartz said. ''He's got a brain the size of a cashew, so you really don't have much to work with.'' And, he added: ''They're known for their aggression, so you're starting from a hard place. His natural impulse is to kill 'em all and let God sort 'em out. You have to work to produce the sweet and cuddly.''
The bus driver called out, ''Grasmere train station,'' and Mr. Schwartz and Chuck hopped out and made for the SIRT -- the Staten Island Rapid Transit, the island's one-line aboveground subway system.
Chuck was a bigger hit on the train than on the bus. He was immediately surrounded by four baggy-pantsed teenagers. ''Y'all just caught that?'' a tall youth asked. A nurse practitioner from Staten Island University Hospital peered into the carrier and grimaced in the way people do when they see a not-quite-cute baby.
''What you got in there?'' a man asked. Mr. Schwartz picked up the carrier and flipped it toward him. ''Groundhog,'' he said.
''Ho!'' the man said, jumping back.
A waitress, Joyce Casey, took one look and was smitten. ''I swear, do not let me get my hands on him,'' she told Mr. Schwartz. ''I will keep him.''
At the Prince's Bay station, almost at the bottom of the island, Mr. Schwartz's wife, Carol, was waiting.
''He slept the whole way on the train,'' Mr. Schwartz said, sounding like a proud father.
''Really?'' Carol Schwartz asked. ''The whole way? Was he good?''
''He was very good.''
In the living room of the Schwartzes' town house, Mr. Schwartz opened the carrier. Chuck poked his head out, carefully marked the door with the scent glands on his face, wandered downstairs and hid under a bed. Mr. Schwartz followed and fished him out.
Chuck lay on his back in Mr. Schwartz's lap in a big red chair. Mr. Schwartz stroked his coarse, brown-gray fur. ''He could do this for hours,'' Mr. Schwartz said.
Chuck's weekend had begun.
Correction:  January 27, 2007, Saturday  An article on Jan. 12 about Staten Island Chuck, a groundhog being prepared for his first Groundhog Day duty by commuting home with his trainer on weekends, included an outdated reference to the train system that Chuck travels on. Since 1994, it has been called the Staten Island Railway, not Staten Island Rapid Transit.
	For the fourth time in less than two years, Clarence Norman, the disgraced former head of the Brooklyn Democratic Party, sat in a courtroom yesterday, watching prospective jurors file in to sit in judgment of him.
Much about the scene was familiar -- the figures at the prosecution table, the presiding judge and a set of charges that do not quite allege what the Brooklyn district attorney has spent five years trying to prove: that judgeships were for sale in Brooklyn and that Mr. Norman was the man who sold them.
In this case, rather, the accusations are that Mr. Norman strong-armed Democratic judicial candidates into hiring the party's favored political consultants.
But even as Mr. Norman went through what has become for him a courtroom routine, hunching his tall frame forward or shrugging a suit sleeve to check his watch, there were fresh allegations of judge-selling in the air.
One came from a sitting judge who, law enforcement officials have said in recent days, told a Brooklyn grand jury that he believed that more than $40,000 was delivered to Mr. Norman by a supporter to secure his appointment to State Supreme Court in 2001.
The other came from the ex-wife of an ex-judge, who was quoted yesterday as saying that she saw her ex-husband hand a party official $5,000 to help clinch his spot on the ballot.
Mr. Norman has long said such allegations are false. But if determined to be true, they would provide a new measure of vindication for District Attorney Charles J. Hynes, whose investigation has sparked a campaign to overhaul the way judges are selected in New York but has not yielded hard proof that lawyers could buy their way onto the bench.
Mr. Hynes's chief of investigations, Assistant District Attorney Michael F. Vecchione, said during a break in Mr. Norman's case yesterday that the latest accusations would also be pursued.
''Any allegation, we'll follow up on,'' he said.
For now, though, Mr. Vecchione's next few weeks will be taken up with trying to convict Mr. Norman yet again. So far he has won two out of three rounds. Mr. Norman, a former 12-term assemblyman, remains free on bail but is facing two to six years in prison after being convicted at separate trials of soliciting illegal contributions and pocketing campaign funds.
In a third trial, he was acquitted of unlawfully billing the Assembly for mileage on his car.
The current case stems from a 2002 campaign when, prosecutors say, Mr. Norman and another party leader, who has since become a prosecution witness, laid down the law for two civil court candidates who were running in the Democratic primary.
The candidates, prosecutors say, were told that if they wanted to ensure the party's robust support on Primary Day, they had to hire the party's favorite printer to design their campaign mailings. The candidates, Karen B. Yellen and Marcia J. Sikowitz, were also told, prosecutors say, that they had to hire a party fund-raiser, and close associate of Mr. Norman's, to recruit street workers and get out the vote.
Judge Sikowitz hired one of the consultants and Judge Yellen hired both, investigators say, but both women lost in the primary to upstarts who ran against the machine. Judge Yellen now sits in Family Court. Judge Sikowitz, a Housing Court judge at the time of the primary, remains one.
The witness list for the trial in Supreme Court in Downtown Brooklyn includes sitting judges from four different courts -- Family, Civil, Housing and Surrogate -- each prepared to testify to the gantlet of Democratic pockets they were asked to line on their way up to the bench.
''That's what this whole trial is about,'' Mr. Hynes's spokesman, Jerry Schmetterer, said. ''Coercion, extortion, the methods they used.'' Mr. Norman is charged with grand larceny. Mr. Norman, through his lawyers, does not deny that candidates were prodded to run their campaigns by the party's rules, using the party's trusted vendors, but says that that is simply the way retail politics is conducted.
Steering candidates and their money to favored consultants is also at the heart of accusations that surfaced yesterday from the ex-wife of a former State Supreme Court justice, Reynold N. Mason.
The ex-wife, Tessa Abrams Mason, told The Daily News that when Mr. Mason was running for Civil Court in 1994, he was told that to join the Democratic team he would have to hire a campaign manager, election lawyer and law clerk of the party's choosing. At one point, Ms. Mason said, Mr. Mason, acting on party orders, also gave $5,000 cash to a party official for no specified benefit.
Mr. Mason, who was removed from the bench in 2003 for dipping into an escrow account and now sells real estate in Atlanta, did not return a telephone call yesterday. Ms. Mason could not be reached.
Five thousand dollars is a small fee compared to the $40,000-plus that one man is said to have given on behalf of Howard A. Ruditzky, whose ascension to the Supreme Court has been something of mystery in the world of Brooklyn judicial politics.
In 2001, Justice Ruditzky, then a lower-court judge with an unremarkable reputation, made a bid for re-election to his post but finished last among four candidates in a primary. But he was then chosen by Mr. Norman to fill a Supreme Court vacancy.
Many political veterans were puzzled. Justice Ruditzky, they said, was neither a loyal party soldier nor a rising judicial star and yet he had somehow leapfrogged over a senior party apparatchik.
Law enforcement officials, however, say that much light was shed on the mystery at hearings of a grand jury that was recently convened to hear allegations against Mr. Norman. There, the officials said, Justice Ruditzky corroborated an account offered by his cousin and chief political sponsor, who had already outlined for investigators what efforts he made to elevate the judge.
The cousin, an owner of medical clinics named Norman Chesler, told grand jurors that he gave Mr. Norman more than $40,000 cash and several thousand more in postage stamps on behalf of the judge, said one of the officials, who was granted anonymity because the investigation was far from finished. Justice Ruditzky's alleged path to power was first laid out in detail last week in The Village Voice.
In the Voice account, Mr. Chesler is quoted as saying that Mr. Norman said that the money would be used to further their private business relationship. But, he said, he continued to believe it would further his cousin's judicial career.
One of Mr. Norman's lawyers, Edward D. Wilford, declined to comment on the payoff charges. ''There's nothing to address,'' he said last night, adding that he and Mr. Norman were focused strictly on winning his acquittal in the current case.
Mr. Chesler did not return several calls for comment. Justice Ruditzky's lawyer, Sheldon Eisenberger, said, ''I have no comment on anything you may ask me.''
While prosecutors could try to charge Mr. Norman in the Ruditzky matter -- a prospect that the same law enforcement official called ''possible, but I don't want to say probable'' -- Justice Ruditzky himself will not be charged. He received immunity for his testimony, the official said.
The decision to offer him immunity may have been influenced by the clock that has been ticking on Mr. Hynes's investigation. The statute of limitations for elected officials is five years from the time they leave the office they held when an offense was committed. So if Justice Ruditzky ever had been a party to bribery, it would have occurred when he was a civil court judge, a post he left in 2001.
Absent an indictment or a finding of wrongdoing by the State Commission on Judicial Conduct, which can take many months,it is nearly impossible to remove a sitting judge.
So Justice Ruditzky continues in his position, which pays $136,000 a year, albeit in a limited capacity. He has not presided over trials since last summer because of what the State Office of Court Administration called ''health issues.''
In the case of Mr. Mason, the statute of limitations on anything he might have done before he became a judge has long since run out.
Whether the new allegations ever lead to criminal charges, they nonetheless seem likely to give further ammunition to those seeking to overhaul the system.
Last year, a federal judge ruled that the system by which party leaders are allowed to handpick Supreme Court candidates violated voters' rights. He ordered state lawmakers to either fix the process or allow open primary elections this year.
Deborah Goldberg, a director of the democracy program at the Brennan Center for Justice at the New York University School of Law, which advocates for judicial reform, said that Mr. Hynes had already made his point.
''The incentive to change is real without an indictment,'' she said.
But Joseph L. Forstadt, a lawyer for the State Supreme Court Justices Association, said that tales of money changing hands only reminded him that if there were open primaries for Supreme Court, candidates would be spending more to get elected, opening the door to further corruption.
Correction:  February 26, 2007, Monday  An article on Feb. 3 about the corruption trial of Clarence Norman Jr., the former assemblyman and Brooklyn Democratic Party leader, misstated the profession of Ernest Lendler, who designed a campaign flier for a judge who ran on the party's ticket during the 2002 primary. Mr. Lendler is a political consultant, not a printer. (The error first appeared in an article on Jan. 24 that referred to Mr. Lendler without naming him, and was repeated on Feb. 2 in an article about the trial.)
An article on Nov. 18, 2003, about the indictment of Mr. Norman referred incorrectly to Mr. Lendler's company, Branford Communications. It is a political consulting firm, not a printing company.
	When the morning shift ends and the afternoon light thins, workers stream out of the Pfizer pharmaceutical plant on Flushing Avenue in Brooklyn.
Some head across the avenue to a brick building emblazoned with the ''Pfizer Quality'' slogan. It is a public charter school now, leased by Pfizer to the city for a dollar a year. A few parents walk their children home to the little white-sided town houses across the street, built partly on land Pfizer gave the city in the 1980s.
A block away at a subway entrance, security cameras installed by Pfizer relay any signs of danger back to the guard station at the plant.
If this area on the Williamsburg-Bedford-Stuyvesant border is not quite Pfizerville, it still may be the closest thing to a factory town in this largely postindustrial city. For 158 years, the Pfizer company has presided over this remote-feeling stretch of Brooklyn, a windswept, big-sky place sliced like a pie by broad, angling streets: first as industrial magnet, then as big brother-benefactor.
So Pfizer's imminent departure, which the company announced on Monday, will mean more than the loss of 600 jobs.
''I wish it didn't have to end,'' said Ricardo Guadalupe, who was laid off from the plant last year and still gazes at the brick behemoth of a factory every time he drops his two sons off at the school. ''I wish it could have lasted forever.''
The school will remain open, but Mr. Guadalupe, who lives several miles away, now works in New Jersey and is not sure how much longer it will make sense to send his children there.
On Monday, Pfizer, the world's biggest pharmaceutical firm, said it would slash 7,800 jobs in the United States, Europe and Japan. Several of its best-selling drugs are losing their patent protection and will face competition from cheaper generics. The jobs at the Brooklyn plant will be phased out over the next two years.
In many quarters, the announcement was not exactly surprising. For a while now, continuing to operate the Brooklyn plant, where Lipitor, Zoloft, Viagra and other drugs are manufactured and distributed, seemed more a good-will gesture to the borough of Pfizer's birth than a business decision.
''They could have left many years ago and found a lower cost-environment,'' said Michael Rochford, executive director of the St. Nicholas Neighborhood Preservation Corporation, a nonprofit group that found buyers for the 140 town houses, named the Edmund T. Pratt Jr. Houses after a Pfizer chairman. ''But they resisted the trend, and then became the catalyst for development as well as providing jobs for the community.''
But surprise or not, the decision is still a shock. ''This was one of the things that you knew in your gut was going to be in the community forever,'' Reginald Tyson, a 40-year-old out-of-work copier technician, said as he walked by the plant on Thursday afternoon. Mr. Tyson never worked at the plant, but his mother did, and like everyone in the neighborhood, he knew dozens of others who worked there, too.
Almost from the day more than a century and a half ago that it introduced its first blockbuster drug, a toffee-flavored intestinal-worm remedy called Santonin, Pfizer has been an outsized presence in Brooklyn.
Its founders shook and moved the borough. A company scion's rumored dalliance with a burlesque actress was grist for the society pages. ''Mr. Pfizer Rises to Explain,'' read an 1893 headline in The New York Times, ''He Is Interested in Nina Farrington, but Did Not Elope With Her.'' A Pfizer president became a co-owner of the Brooklyn Dodgers.
Brooklyn, of course, changed, and by the 1970s, the neighborhood around the plant had become a burnt-out dead zone. Drugs and crime were rampant. Inhabited buildings were not.
Pfizer, which had moved its headquarters from Flushing Avenue to Manhattan in 1961, tried to attract other industrial tenants to the area but could not.
Rather than fleeing, as so many manufacturers and corporations did all over New York City in the 1970s, Pfizer, wanting to hold onto both its veteran work force and its birthplace, decided to help rebuild the neighborhood, on the theory that it would be both good for business and good for the neighbors.
It formed a public-private partnership with the city to develop jobs, housing and education. ''Nothing like it has been tried before by a manufacturer in the city,'' The New York Times wrote in 1985.
Pfizer had plenty of unused land near the plant. It cleaned up the property -- not a cheap endeavor -- and granted some to the city for the town houses, two-family starter homes for low- and middle-income owners. The company bought tax credits and conveyed them to nonprofit developers. A handful of blocks away, Pfizer invested in a St. Nicholas corporation apartment building whose tenants used to be homeless.
In 1989, an educational reform group wanted to open an alternative public school in the neighborhood. Pfizer offered it the vacant four-story building across Flushing Avenue from the plant, kicked in half a million dollars for renovations and offered a broad support network for the school, called the Beginning with Children Charter School.
''Whenever the founding principal would have an issue, she'd call up Pfizer,'' said Mimi Corcoran, executive director of the Beginning with Children Foundation, which runs the school. ''Employees would come over and mentor our children. They'd send over engineers. They helped build our science labs.''
Where the towering Pfizer smokestack once stood, Pfizer architects and engineers drew up plans and oversaw construction of a beautiful playground, complete with a gazebo area where the children can have class outside in nice weather.
''It sounds kind of Pollyannaish,'' Ms. Corcoran said, ''but they were incredibly generous.''
Pfizer's loyalty to the city has been amply rewarded by the Bloomberg administration. In 2003, the company was granted $46 million in tax breaks, spread over 15 years, in return for expanding operations in Manhattan. It was not clear whether the closing of the Brooklyn plant would prompt the city to cancel the tax break.
The school now has 450 students, and its students consistently score higher than the city average, and far higher than students at schools in the surrounding area. Parents who work at the plant feel torn.
''If I could happen to find some job around here and still keep my kids in the school, that would be great,'' said Sam Hernandez, a warehouse operator with 11 years experience.
But Mr. Hernandez, 30, has moved to Staten Island -- thanks in part to the relatively high wages at Pfizer, which can reach $30 an hour for veteran operators. Like Mr. Guadalupe, Mr. Hernandez said he was not sure how long his children would stay at the school.
Even after the plant shuts down, Pfizer has promised it will not abandon the area. It plans to spend several million dollars to help turn its boarded-up original 1849 headquarters next to the school into the Charles Pfizer Community Education Center. The center will offer after-school programs, adult education and a training center for science and math teachers.
Pfizer owns about 10 acres around the plant and, company officials say, wants to work with the community and the city to come up with a comprehensive plan for it that includes housing and commercial space as it sells off its holdings.
''Despite the difficult decision to close the facility,'' said Richard Luftglass, Pfizer's senior director for philanthropy, ''we do appreciate the legacy that is there. And we appreciate the obligation to the community.''
The neighborhoodaround the plant remains shaky and shabby in places, but Kathryn S. Wylde, the president of the Partnership for New York City, a nonprofit business coalition of which Pfizer has been a longtime member, said there was only so much one company could do. And she thanked Pfizer for its efforts.
''Had they closed this plant 20 years ago,'' she said, ''it would have been a devastating blow to New York City and to that community in particular. Today, given the state of the economy and the renaissance of Brooklyn, it's a blow, but it's one that we can survive.''
	