The catastrophic merger of America Online and Time Warner, announced in January 2000 and completed a year later, was, Kara Swisher writes, ''the heist of the very new century.'' AOL, which sells access to the Internet over telephone lines, managed to buy a storied media conglomerate that included Time magazine, the Warner Brothers movie studio, CNN, theme parks and book publishers, using wildly inflated dot-com wampum.
Why AOL would want to convert its overvalued stock into something more tangible, as the economic fever of the late 1990's spiked, was obvious. You might even call the acquisition savvy, except that it now appears that AOL's numbers were doubly inflated, both by mania and by questionable accounting. The tougher question is why in the world Gerald M. Levin, the chairman of Time Warner, decided to sell his company to a boring, dinky Internet service provider, or I.S.P., that was about to be swamped by faster services, including Time Warner's own cable systems.
In 2002, Robert Hughes, Time magazine's art critic, put that question to Levin in an e-mail message later published in Tina Brown's column in a London newspaper. ''How can I convey to you the disgust which your name awakens in me?'' Hughes asked. ''How can you face yourself knowing how much history, value and savings you have thrown away on your mad, ignorant attempt to merge with a wretched dial-up I.S.P.?'' At least three books have now tried to answer that question, and a fourth is on the way.
''Fools Rush In,'' by Nina Munk, a contributing editor at Vanity Fair, is the best so far. Marrying exemplary reporting with lively, lucid writing, she makes a convincing -- nay, devastating -- case that Levin wrecked the legacy of Henry Luce, the founder of Time Inc., in the service of his ego. Levin wanted to redeem his weak performance at the company's helm with what he liked to call a transforming transaction.
He had already transformed Time once, in 1990, when he helped engineer its merger with Warner Communications. That was another lousy deal. What he transformed in the AOL merger was $200 billion of his shareholders' money into nothing.
There is a larger point in Munk's acid portrait. No one stood up to Levin, though many later claimed to have seen the folly of the AOL deal. Levin had become, in his own words, an ''imperial C.E.O.'' Such chief executives, abetted by pliant boards, submissive underlings and craven accountants, bankers and lawyers, have the sort of arbitrary power of which despots can only dream.
Levin, who provided plenty of access to the authors of all three of the books on the merger, does not come off well in any of them, but he reserved his flakiest comments for Munk. ''It's absolutely true that I plotted the departure of Nick Nicholas after working with him for 20 years,'' Levin told her about the palace coup that got him the top job at Time Warner in 1992. ''And I don't have justifications for it other than that I'm a strange person.'' He did cite Albert Camus by way of explanation. As he explained to Munk in another context, his own philosophy was rooted in what he learned from Camus: ''That we impute meaning and purpose to things that are totally adventitious or accidental; that there is no God; that there just is; that there's no life after death.'' Fine for grad school, and probably true, but not exactly suited to the boardroom.
Levin's counterpart at AOL, Stephen M. Case, is famously bland, a vague and uninteresting figure. He likes khakis and expensive wine, and it is a good bet that he hasn't been reading much Camus lately. Levin has called him an ''automaton,'' with ''no spirituality.''
But Case was a good judge of character. In approaching Levin about the merger, he immediately offered to make Levin chief executive officer. ''If he'd said anything else, there's no way I would have gone ahead,'' Levin told Munk (minus a swear word for emphasis between ''no'' and ''way'').
Levin is gone now, having resigned from the company in December 2001. Case remains on its board, though he stepped down as chairman in May 2003. Time Warner reclaimed its maiden name last October. Case remains very rich, having sold hundreds of millions of dollars worth of AOL stock just before and during the merger. Levin was not a seller, and he rode the stock all the way down. That is a testament to his integrity and his obtuseness both.
''Stealing Time,'' another book about the merger, by Alec Klein of The Washington Post, came out last summer. It is a meaty, brisk and conventional work, based on Klein's vigorous investigation of AOL's unorthodox accounting methods. Klein's achievements really come to life, oddly, in Munk's book. In a riveting passage, Munk describes AOL Time Warner's disgraceful efforts to bully The Post into spiking Klein's articles. The company, itself the home of some of the nation's most respected journalists and a supposed friend of the First Amendment, reacted to questions from Klein by hiring one of the nation's most feared libel lawyers, Thomas Yannucci, and threatening to sue. The shameful episode captures in an anecdote Levin's folly in allowing AOL's corrosive values to find a home in his company. The Post, needless to say, did not bend.
With ''There Must Be a Pony in Here Somewhere,'' Kara Swisher, a technology columnist for The Wall Street Journal, has written a breezy, entertaining and glib book about ''the AOL Time Warner debacle,'' but it is only nominally about the merger. The deal, in Swisher's hands, is an occasion for remarks, and her book is a memoir and a manifesto. Its real burden is to make the case that, failed mergers and market collapses or no, the Internet is still important.
Swisher was a regular participant in many conferences devoted to the digital era. (Those conferences were the only consistently profitable product generated by the Internet economy.) Her book sometimes reads like comments from the dais. ''I am still a believer,'' she writes. ''In the wake of the crash, true faith in the eventual dominance of the Internet is not an easy thing to admit to. In fact, largely because of this one disastrous deal, saying you believe in the Internet as a revolutionary medium is a bit like admitting to a capital crime.''
The books by Swisher and Klein are lopsided, focused predominantly on AOL, the less interesting of the two companies. Munk is more balanced, and her digging went deeper. Sometimes, indeed, she provides too much detail: the precise amount of the mortgage payments Levin's parents made in 1932, the brand of hair gel used by an AOL salesman.
Swisher insists that AOL deserves a place in history, at least, ''by popularizing the online experience'' over the telephone. But there is no future in that, and AOL has not shown itself to be at all nimble in finding a way to make money from people who connect to the Internet at higher speeds. Swisher provides the better portrait of Ted Turner, by far the most interesting and authentic figure in the saga. Turner sold CNN and the rest of his cable empire to Time Warner in 1995 and lost $7 billion as the stock sank after the AOL merger. He was, Swisher writes, ''the voluble weather vane of the deal.''
Swisher's book's title is taken from a joke President Reagan liked to tell, later adopted by an AOL executive. Its upshot was an exclamation made by an optimistic boy encountering a pile of manure. One supposes she is making fun of Levin, Case and others, elbow deep in the synergistic muck, hoping to find something of value. But the title captures something of Swisher's own attitude. She remains, she says over and over, thoroughly optimistic about the transformative power of the Internet.
She has absorbed the jargon, certainly. Companies compete ''in the interactive space.'' Time Warner was at one point ''sniffing around the portal space.'' At another, it was ''nowhere to be found in the Internet space.'' AOL, on the other hand, was trying ''to break into the enterprise space.'' One wishes that Swisher, whose book is quite readable, had spent a little more time in the journalism space.
Adam Liptak is the national legal correspondent of The Times.
	The discussion was supposed to be about Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, who were executed in 1953 for espionage and have haunted the artistic imagination ever since.
E. L. Doctorow was there, and he talked about his 1971 novel ''The Book of Daniel,'' which considers a couple modeled on the Rosenbergs through the eyes of their orphaned son. So was Tony Kushner, who placed the ghost of Ethel Rosenberg at the deathbed of her prosecutor Roy Cohn in his Pulitzer Prize-winning play ''Angels in America.''
But their conversation, sponsored by Fordham Law School and presented Thursday night at the Park Cafe in the Time Warner Center before an audience of about 200 people, soon moved from the Rosenberg trial to more timely issues. ''Do artists worry about getting it right at all?'' asked Thane Rosenbaum, a novelist and law professor who served as the evening's moderator. ''Is that the burden of the artist?''
Mr. Doctorow and Mr. Kushner touched on the recently released Steven Spielberg film ''Munich.'' (The script, about the targeted killings Israel is said to have conducted after 11 of its athletes were murdered at the 1972 Olympics, was written by Mr. Kushner and Eric Roth.) The panelists went on to discuss James Frey's disputed memoir, ''A Million Little Pieces,'' as well as reality television and the arguments offered for the Iraq war, trying to locate the varying obligations of art and other kinds of discourse to historical truth.
''There's a tolerance for lying and a tolerance for confusing fact and fiction that has grown and grown and grown,'' Mr. Kushner said. ''It's interesting,'' he added, that the liberties Mr. Frey took in his memoir have ''both provoked outrage and not.''
Attempting what he called ''some badly articulated French theory,'' Mr. Kushner said, ''We're making a kind of reality that's coming increasingly to supplant the rock we are standing on.''
But though both writers have appropriated historical events and figures for their fictions, neither admitted to complicity in the trend.
''Our justification and our salvation is that people know we're liars,'' Mr. Doctorow said. ''The kind of genre-blurring done by the president of the United States is quite different. He is a storyteller, a fabulist, and presents as truth and facts stuff that is totally fictive.''
Mr. Doctorow, unhurried and reflective and occasionally aphoristic, said ''The Book of Daniel'' had been a sort of turning point for him. His later novels, from ''Ragtime'' in 1975 through ''The March'' last year, featured actual named historical figures. In ''The Book of Daniel,'' the Rosenbergs were fictionalized, becoming Paul and Rochelle Isaacson. ''I didn't want to write about the Rosenbergs,'' Mr. Doctorow said. ''I wanted to write about what happened to them.''
Moreover, he said, he could not find a place in his book for Ethel Rosenberg's brother, David Greenglass, whose testimony helped send the couple to the electric chair. ''No work of fiction could make that believable,'' Mr. Doctorow said. ''It's too incredible and unnatural and hideous.''
His later novels, Mr. Doctorow said, contained versions of historical figures akin to painted portraits. ''The compact between you and your audience is clear: this is my rendering.'' In any event, he added, ''public figures make fictions of themselves long before you get to them.''
''If you really want to read fiction about J. P. Morgan,'' who was a character in ''Ragtime,'' ''read his authorized biography,'' Mr. Doctorow said.
Mr. Kushner, wiry and alert, said his indelible version of Roy Cohn in ''Angels in America'' was firmly rooted in the historical record.
''I loved writing Roy Cohn,'' Mr. Kushner said. ''More than any other character, I loved writing in his voice.''
In a clip from the HBO version of ''Angels in America'' played for the audience, Al Pacino, playing Cohn, explained his role in assuring Ethel Rosenberg's death. ''That sweet unprepossessing woman, two kids, boo-hoo, reminded us all of our little Jewish mamas -- she came this close to getting life,'' the Cohn character said. ''I pleaded till I wept to put her in the chair.''
The Rosenbergs' sons, Robert and Michael Meeropol, watched from the front row.
Mr. Kushner said he did not use historical figures for instruction or verisimilitude. ''There is a power that you access that doesn't have to do with credibility but with a shared understanding,'' he said, adding that there was a transgressive thrill to it, too.
Mr. Kushner said that the controversy over ''Munich,'' which has largely concerned accusations of a false equivalence between the murder of the athletes and the retribution that followed, had caused him to think hard about art and responsibility. ''There is no doubt, there is no question whatsoever, that this program took place,'' Mr. Kushner said. ''The debate about 'Munich' is completely politically overdetermined.''
But, he said, there are two essential questions about the artistic presentation of history. ''The first question is, Did this happen?'' he said, adding that the only responsible answer must be yes. The second question, he said, is ''Did this happen in this way?''
''The answer to that,'' Mr. Kushner said, ''if you're a grown-up, is 'Not necessarily.' ''
	In a recent series of written dissents, Justice Elizabeth A. Weaver of the Michigan Supreme Court has accused four of her colleagues of ''bully tactics,'' ''abuses of power and grossly unprofessional conduct'' and trying to censor her.
In response, in a confidential draft opinion, the court's chief justice has accused Justice Weaver of behaving like ''a child engaging in a tantrum.'' In the opinion, Chief Justice Clifford W. Taylor suggested that she continue her protests with a hunger strike, as that ''seemed to have the potential for everyone to be a winner.''
Students of judicial history in Michigan and elsewhere said they could not remember a similar judicial melee.
''The justices of the Michigan Supreme Court are making spectacles of themselves," said Richard D. Friedman, a law professor at the University of Michigan. ''They really should start acting like grown-ups.''
The justices' exchanges, which continued this week, have been fueled by personal animus. But their disagreements involve serious issues, including First Amendment principles and judicial ethics.
The justices differ about whether they may disclose the details of the court's internal deliberations, about whether lawyers are free to criticize them personally and about how motions seeking their disqualification should be treated.
On Wednesday in Lansing, the state capital, the justices held a hearing about a rule it adopted by a vote of 4 to 3 last month. The rule forbids justices from making public ''correspondence, memoranda and discussions regarding cases or controversies,'' but does not specify a punishment for violations.
The new rule has not deterred Justice Weaver. On her Web site, www.justiceweaver.com, portions of Chief Justice Taylor's draft opinion attacking her appeared this month, after the rule was adopted.
More than 20 people spoke at the hearing, most of them supporting the rule, a court spokeswoman said.
One of the speakers, Judge Richard F. Suhrheinrich of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, said in an interview on Wednesday that the secrecy of judicial deliberations is crucial to ensuring robust, unfettered and un-self-conscious debate.
''Judges on that particular court have decided to make the deliberations public,'' Judge Suhrheinrich said, ''and it has caused a great deal of problems.''
Through a spokeswoman, Chief Justice Taylor declined a request for an interview. In an interview with Michigan Public Radio on Wednesday, he lashed out at Justice Weaver, saying ''she has been very difficult to deal with'' since she was passed over for a second term as chief justice in 2001.
''Believe me,'' Chief Justice Taylor said, ''she doesn't have anything. It's just about time this soap opera stopped.''
In a written dissent last month, Justice Weaver called the new rule a gag order. She said it conflicts with a provision in Michigan's Constitution requiring dissenting judges to give their reasons.
Judicial deliberations are almost universally protected from outside scrutiny. There is not much law, however, on the question of whether participants in the deliberations may themselves be forbidden to disclose exchanges in which they participated.
Justice Weaver wrote last month that the immediate purpose of the new rule was to suppress a dissent that she had written in a disciplinary case. She added that her primary obligations were to the public rather than her colleagues.
The new rule, she wrote, cannot constitutionally apply to ''repeated personal slurs, name calling and abuses of power, such as threats to exclude a justice from conference discussions, to ban a justice from the Hall of Justice or to hold a dissenting justice in contempt.''
The disciplinary case that gave rise to the judicial disagreement involved Geoffrey Fieger, a prominent plaintiffs' lawyer and politician who ran unsuccessfully for governor in 1998. His opponent, Gov. John M. Engler, appointed four of the justices on the current Supreme Court.
Those justices were in the majority in a 4-to-3 decision in July that reprimanded Mr. Fieger for intemperate language about several appeals court judges.
''They held that the First Amendment doesn't apply to lawyers,'' Mr. Fieger said in an interview.
In her dissent in the matter, Justice Weaver said the four justices should have disqualified themselves from Mr. Fieger's case because they had displayed ''bias and prejudice'' in public comments made about him.
In the majority opinion, the justices acknowledged that they had tangled politically with Mr. Fieger, but said that having done so did not require their disqualification.
In a related federal case, the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit last month reinstated a suit by Mr. Fieger that challenged Michigan's judicial disqualification rules as a violation of due process. Justices of the Michigan Supreme Court, like judges on most state high courts, decide for themselves whether to grant motions seeking their disqualification.
''The traditions of deciding on recusal are due for a fresh review, because there is a new world swirling around the courts,'' said Bert Brandenburg, the executive director of Justice at Stake, a judicial reform group. Increasingly expensive and nasty judicial election campaigns and political attacks on judicial independence are part of that new world, Mr. Brandenburg said.
Justice Weaver did not respond to a request for comment, but an aide directed a reporter to materials on her Web site, which includes photographs, opinions, press releases and speeches. It also features her ''10 Principles for Living.''
Principle No. 6: ''Avoid unnecessary disputes and confrontations.''
	