Howard Dean may be hinging his candidacy on Wisconsin, but a growing number of Democrats say if he cannot win the Washington caucuses here on Saturday, he should take that as a cue and bow out.
''If he can't win here, he can't win anywhere,'' said Cathy Allen, a Democratic strategist in Seattle unaffiliated with any campaign.
If any place should still count as Howard Dean country, it would be here.Seattle is where the former Vermont governor began to build his base more than a year ago, where he drew more than 8,000 people to a rally downtown last summer and where his antiwar message fueled the political fervor for which this liberal city is known.
Washington State, much less liberal as a whole than Seattle, also has a traditional inclination toward underdogs and unpredictable outcomes. In the 1992 caucuses, Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts ran far ahead of the pack, with Bill Clinton finishing fourth, although the state also held a primary that year that Mr. Clinton won.
In 1984, Senator Gary Hart of Colorado scored a victory with Democrats here, and in 1988, the Rev. Jesse Jackson made one of his strongest showings, slightly behind Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts.
Dr. Dean has raised almost as much money in this state as all his rivals combined, $679,842 since declaring his candidacy, according to the Center for Public Integrity, a nonpartisan organization. Dr. Dean has repeatedly made optimistic predictions about Washington, where he made several appearances on Tuesday and Wednesday.
On Thursday, in a conference call from Michigan with Washington reporters, he was asked whether Washington was a ''make or break'' state for his campaign.
''Our plan is to win there,'' Dr. Dean said. ''And that's all I'm going to say. Our plan is to win Washington.''
Although no reliable polls have been announced on how Washington may vote, political consultants said they believed that a persistently loyal base here for Dr. Dean gave him a chance of making a showing.
''Because Dean has such a strong base and it is his strategy that this is his turnaround state -- the state he could win -- I would give him odds right now,'' Frank Greer, a Democratic consultant whose firm is working for Senator John Kerry, said. ''It's been astounding when you live in Seattle to see how many folks were for Dean. But I feel that shifting.''
In the last week, a growing number of Dr. Dean's supporters, as well as a number of the most prominent Democratic politicians in the state, including Gov. Gary Locke and six of the state's eight Democratic Congressional delegates, endorsed Mr. Kerry. They said they were closing ranks behind the candidate who they said had the best chance of beating President Bush.
Mr. Kerry's growing strength has also been evident. On Tuesday, he packed more than 2,000 people into a downtown hotel. On Wednesday, Dr. Dean drew 200 to a rally at another downtown hotel.
The chairman of the state party, Paul Berendt, has backed Dr. Dean, pointing up a divide in the party that started becoming noticeable in the last week, as more state elected officials began to join Mr. Kerry's camp.
Mr. Berendt, who said he was expecting a record turnout on Saturday because of unusually high interest in the caucuses, acknowledged how crucial Washington was for Dr. Dean and his supporters.
''Howard has to win some place, and if it's not here, it has to be Maine or Wisconsin or some place pretty soon,'' he said. ''It's very important that he win, and we need that.''
Dr. Dean's campaign officials in Washington played down the endorsements for Mr. Kerry and said they continued to count on a victory here.
''The only real endorsement that matters right now is all those people who show up for Governor Dean on Saturday,'' Steve Haro, a spokesman for Dr. Dean's campaign, said in Washington. ''The roots here are as deep as they are wide.''
The Washington State director of Mr. Kerry's campaign, Ali Wade, said she had seen many former supporters of Dr. Dean decamp to support Mr. Kerry.
''I think what's happened is they've seen the strong victories in Iowa and New Hampshire,'' Ms. Wade said, ''and it makes them look closer at the candidates. A lot of them thought Dean had all the momentum, that Dean could win. But then Dean couldn't win.''
Doug Davies, who lives in Renton, a suburb of Seattle, and is volunteering for Dr. Dean's campaign, posted an upbeat message on Wednesday on the Dean Web log for the state that said:
''This is a wonderful time to be a Washingtonian. This state has never played a significant role in presidential politics before, but this year we will be remembered as the state where Dean people made a stand and the tide was turned! Go get 'em!''
Diane Kenny, who runs a health-care communications company with her husband here, also said she had not been swayed by Mr. Kerry's victories.
''I'm going to the caucus and support Dean all the way,'' Ms. Kenny said. ''I think he feels like I feel. And I'm really mad.''
But Ms. Kenny was preparing herself for a defeat.
''I've still got my McCarthy and my McGovern buttons,'' she said. ''So I'm somebody who's been through this before.''
Her husband, Dennis, who said Dr. Dean enthralled him last summer on his stops here, said that in the last few days he had begun to lean toward Mr. Kerry.
''I'm not born again as a Kerry supporter,'' Mr. Kenny said. ''But he just seems to have momentum and be thoughtful, and it really sounds like the voters in several states have concluded that he's the guy they trust to take the fight to W.''
Governor Locke, who said in an interview he had wavered between Dr. Dean and Mr. Kerry but endorsed Mr. Kerry last week, said winning the Washington caucuses was crucial for Dr. Dean.
''It would be a boost for Governor Dean and enable him to continue moving forward,'' Mr. Locke said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: WASHINGTON
	On a recent afternoon on the top floor of the Boise State University student union, 30 people filed into a glass-walled room with a stark view of the Boise foothills, the city's magical mini-mountain range, steppingstones to the Salmon River Mountains, which eventually loop their way up to Idaho's eastern border and over to the Rockies.
It was a clear winter day -- and a city that is close enough to drizzly Seattle and Portland, Ore., to be considered a piece of the Northwest has every right to gloat about its 234 days of sunshine each year. Puffs of fog clung to the sharp, snowy foothills that rise a mile above the Treasure Valley floor, telegraphing the kind of shocking beauty that can make Idaho look like one big postcard.
The people in the room, who might be considered the political and economic movers and shakers in this city of 193,000 people, were assembled by Boise's new mayor to talk about his transition. They were not there to discuss the foothills per se. It seemed right, though, that the hills were there in full view, representing themselves as another character in the debate over the future of Boise, at a time when the questions have so much to do with the look and feel of this place.
The hills were a political battleground just a short time ago. But then a vocal group of people who wanted to keep developers out of the hills won what they consider a historic fight, persuading fellow residents to do something fairly unthinkable in Idaho: tax themselves, to the tune of $10 million, to buy open space.
''We can't afford to waste any time,'' the mayor, Dave Bieter, 44, told his advisers. ''People's expectations are quite high.''
Sometimes scandal does that to a city. And what happened with the last mayor, Brent Coles, was pretty earth-shattering for Boise, Idaho's capital, where city politics had largely been in the realm of the pure.
Mr. Coles resigned last February and in November pleaded guilty to two charges: presenting a fraudulent account or voucher for reimbursement from the city for tickets to ''Oklahoma!'' in New York City for himself and members of his staff; and misuse of public funds, for seeking reimbursement from the city for a trip he and a staff member took from New York City to Rochester. He was sentenced to 180 days in the county jail and three years' probation on those charges, both felonies.
The way this Republican-leaning city cleaned its political house, electing its first Democratic mayor in 20 years and replacing four longtime members of the six-member City Council, has allowed it to step back and dig into the bigger identity question.
''I think this could be seen as a watershed election,'' said Dr. Jim Weatherby, a professor of political science at Boise State. ''It was as much about maintaining our quality of life as it was about partisan politics.''
As isolated as Boise is, at the nexus of the high desert and the western edge of the Rockies and still close to the middle of nowhere, it became a migration magnet in the 1990's. It drew scores of jobless people from California and other depressed states to what was, until recently, an economic oasis.
Micron Technologies, now one of the world's leading manufacturers of superconductors and Idaho's largest private employer, was founded here in 1978. Hewlett-Packard is here, and Boise's other high-tech companies were spared much of the strangulation from the dot-com bust that left most of the Northwest in the dumps.
Recreation, the weather and the outdoor life are other big lures. Boise is known as the City of Trees, because the French-Canadian fur traders who came through the desert and discovered it in the early 1800's were delighted to find a cottonwood forest flanking what is now the Boise River. (''Les bois!'' they shouted. The woods!)
In the summer, people take tubing breaks at lunch, floating down the river through the city. There is serious hiking to be done here, skiing less than 16 miles from downtown, world-famous white-water rafting, bike trails everywhere and -- although maybe not for long -- a reasonable level of traffic.
At the same time that it seemed everyone was discovering Boise, Idaho's birthrate remained among the highest in the nation and the state's rural and urban populations flip-flopped, with a majority now living in or near cities and a minority living in the hinterlands.
Boise itself grew by almost 70,000 people over the last decade, according to the 2000 census. Sprawl and the vast increase in vehicular traffic have caused huge concerns -- not just about congestion on the roads and the increasingly obvious need for much better public transit, but also about protecting the environment, in the broadest sense -- the very thing that seems to be drawing all these people here.
The Treasure Valley has a growing air quality problem because of smog resulting from cars. And its temperate inversions, once beautiful, now troubling -- this happens when cold air gets trapped under warm air in the valley -- are trapping pollution with them.
Growth is a topic everywhere these days, especially in the West. But the unusual thing about what is happening in Boise is that city officials and other concerned citizens are examining the problems of growth before they are full-blown problems.
''It's a smaller scale at this point,'' Dr. Weatherby of Boise State said, ''but I remember when Phoenix was 400,000 and Mason, Tempe and Scottsdale were all distinct cities. It can happen, and it could happen here.''
Elaine Clegg, the co-executive director of Idaho Smart Growth, a nonprofit organization founded in 1997, and one of the new City Council members, said, ''In Boise, we have an opportunity to make some of these changes, to do some of these things before the worst of the damage is done, rather than after.''
At a noisy pub in the hip and busy downtown, Mayor Bieter seemed concerned about what Boise was facing.
''It's fair to say this is about the identity of Boise,'' he said. ''That's absolutely what the election was about, what the next six or eight years or going to be about: whether we have the guts to grow in a way that keeps the environmental natural resources that we have here and the livability of this city.''
BOISE LETTER  Correction:  February 24, 2004, Tuesday  An article on Feb. 7 on the growth of Boise, Idaho, misstated a place name in a quotation from Dr. Jim Weatherby, a professor of political science at Boise State, who commented on the phenomenon of sprawl. He said, ''I remember when Phoenix was 400,000 and Mesa, Tempe and Scottsdale were all distinct cities.'' He did not say Mason.
	When the crew from Fire Engine Company 22 raced off at 7:50 a.m. the other day for the first call of their 24-hour shift, a woman reporting chest pains, their big red rig was primed for action but missing a typical feature: a man.
The four members of Engine 22, Division A, a captain, an engineer, a firefighter-paramedic and a firefighter, protect the Point Loma neighborhood of San Diego, an affluent peninsula on the Pacific Ocean. They are one of the few crews in the nation made up entirely of women, winding up together last October, as the captain, Joi Evans, said, because of ''the way the cards fell.''
Together they work, cook, shop, train and sleep in small dorm rooms in the station house, around the clock for 10 days a month, at a time when women are making some inroads into the fire service nationwide but are still only a sliver of the front line in one of the most physically grueling and male-dominated professions. With women accounting for about 8 percent of the 880 uniformed firefighters assigned to its station houses, compared with the national average of 2.5 percent, the San Diego Fire-Rescue Department, which has a female assistant chief, is considered one of the best departments for women to work, according to Women in the Fire Service, an advocacy group based in Madison, Wis.
With an even higher number of women, Minneapolis had its first female fire chief sworn in a year ago, and 17 percent of its 380 uniformed firefighters are women, the department says.
On the other end of the spectrum, in the New York City Fire Department, the nation's largest and long considered by critics to be a backwater for women in firefighting, only 36 of the 11,430 uniformed firefighters are female, according to the department's latest figures.
''We're seeing the most progressive fire departments really doing a good job,'' said Terese M. Floren, executive director of Women in the Fire Service, who became one of the nation's first female firefighters when she started her career in Ohio in the 1970's. ''But the rest of the fire service needs to get up to that mark, because they are not there. And when you are no longer an anomaly, no longer a token, no longer turning somebody's head, then you will have arrived.''
Women have made greater gains in San Diego than in many other cities, officials said, partly because of a 1974 consent decree that required the fire department to recruit women and minorities. The 10-year decree came after a lawsuit filed by five women who said they were wrongly fired in the last weeks of their academy training in the early 1970's.
For the women of Engine 22, life in the station house on Catalina Boulevard and out on the streets of Point Loma is distinctly different now than it was before each of them worked with an all-woman crew.
Three have served almost two decades in San Diego and other cities. Each was, for many of those years, the only woman in a fire crew, at a time when they did not dare shower in the station house, when, their bladders bursting, they ran to restrooms at coffee shops or a florist, when they had to tailor their uniforms at the waist and chest, when they put up with snide remarks, pranks, hazing or worse from their male colleagues.
''I could have written a book,'' said April Lallo, 41, the firefighter-paramedic, who worked for the Los Angeles Fire Department for five years and in Orange County for nine. Ms. Lallo left the fire service to become a stockbroker but returned to the profession in San Diego after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks because, she said, ''My heart is really in this job.''
''If you speak out,'' Ms. Lallo said, ''it really hurts you to go on because then guys look at you and they're afraid of you. I don't want that. I can't change things here, or in the fire service, but I feel like I can influence them by being positive, coming in and just showing them we don't have an agenda, we're here to work with you.''
The engineer, Melissa Cleary, 47, who maintains and drives the fire engine and has worked for the department here for 16 years, said she felt that as a female firefighter working with men, ''You can't mess up.''
''The thing about the four of us being together,'' Ms. Cleary said, ''is we can make mistakes and we can laugh at one another and you don't have to feel like you're never going to hear the end of it.''
''What if you need help with something?'' she added. ''I would never ask a man to help me with something.''
After the 7:50 a.m. call, the crew members prepared breakfast in the kitchen at the small station house, offering Ms. Lallo, who is on a diet, oatmeal and other healthy alternatives to the cinnamon buns in the oven.
They teased Captain Evans, who is 47 and bears a striking resemblance to Martha Stewart, saying she was super-tidy and obsessed with decorating. They call her Martha Senior, though they make sure to tell her that she looks more like Ms. Stewart's daughter than like her sister. Ms. Cleary, who has run 33 marathons and rides a Harley, is known as Martha Junior because she does most of the cooking.
Among the four, there is deep trust, unconditional support and, of course, the freedom to talk about waxing, constipation and the ''Oprah bra.'' (Ms. Lallo said that after seeing a show on bras, she rushed to Nordstrom to buy one that actually fit.)
After breakfast, the crew members went out on what they called a Code 9, an hour of exercise consisting of jogging and strength training at a park on Shelter Island. As they jogged in their department-issue T-shirts and shorts, their radios attached to their hips, an elderly man asked, ''Are you cold, ladies?''
Ms. Cleary said no.
''I could light a fire,'' the man replied, and the crew members laughed.
As they left the park and climbed back into the fire engine, setting out to shop for lunch and dinner, a young man asked if he could be photographed with them.
''Did you just graduate?'' he asked.
Under her breath, Ms. Lallo said, ''Yeah, like 20 years ago.''
Robyn Benincasa, 39, the firefighter, said: ''Just graduating from the academy? That's a new one.''
The crew is also often noticed by women, who think -- especially when the women are in full bunker gear and helmets -- that the rig may be loaded with hunky male firefighters. On several occasions, the crew members said, women have approached the rig and lifted their shirts.
The rest of the day was fairly quiet and included a training session in which the women practiced rappelling down cliffs above the ocean. They went out on five calls in 24 hours, four of them medical emergencies and one from someone who was locked out of his car. The lock-out call came at 7:30 p.m., just as Captain Evans was grilling chicken for a Caesar salad and Ms. Lallo was making whole-wheat croutons.
About 85 percent of the crew's calls are health related, the firefighters said, as many fire departments have merged paramedic and firefighter operations. Here in California, with a fast-growing population of immigrants and others without health insurance, the crew often feels like ''the doctor's office,'' Ms. Benincasa said.
The crew members described exposure to diseases like AIDS on medical calls or getting killed by a car on the freeway responding to an accident as the biggest dangers of the job. But Ms. Benincasa, a top adventure sports racer, said her scariest moment came not while firefighting, but while swimming in Class IV rapids in Tibet.
The four members of the crew helped fight the harrowing wildfires that ravaged Southern California in 2003, but none reported having a near-death experience or a dramatic rescue from a flaming building in their years on the job.
Even so, just carrying 75 pounds of gear on their backs as they fight fires has inflicted many injuries, they said. The San Diego Fire-Rescue Department responded to 320 structure fires -- buildings, homes or businesses -- in the last fiscal year, and 43 since Jan. 1.
There is a much higher percentage of female police officers and paramedics than professional firefighters. The physical demands are cited as one reason more women are not in the fire service. In addition, the 24-hour shifts make it difficult for some women to find child care.
The other fields in public safety also opened to women sooner because firefighters, unlike paramedics and police officers, traditionally lived full time, fraternity-style, in the station houses. The presence of women in the other professions has also helped draw more women to them.
As night fell here and the crew members finished dinner, they chatted about the day and their personal lives. All but Ms. Lallo, a single mother raising a 2-year-old girl she adopted as an infant, are dating San Diego firefighters.
After dinner it was time for ''stretch and skate,'' meaning a light yoga-style workout and, on this night, watching the figure skating championships.
The season premiere of ''24,'' however, one of Ms. Lallo's favorite shows, was on television, so she holed up in her dorm room while the other three began the stretching.
Captain Evans was concerned that Ms. Lallo might be lonely, so Ms. Cleary said over the loudspeaker: ''Stretch and '24.' Stretch and '24' in the bullpen,'' referring to the station's main office, and Ms. Lallo joined in the stretching.
Soon, the crew members went to sleep, roused later, at 4:45 a.m., by a call about a sick elderly man who had fallen out of his bed. By about 7:30 a.m., the next crew, Division B -- four men -- arrived at the station house to relieve Division A.
In this station house, male firefighters contend with friendly pranks by the women. Though many men in the fire service are known as excellent chefs, Ms. Cleary had pasted a strip of yellow police tape across Division B's refrigerator: ''Danger: Men Cooking.''
	The police here have had their share of high-profile violent or deadly run-ins with protesters, mentally ill suspects and other lawbreakers. But in 2003, for the first time in 15 years, no one here was shot and killed by the police.
Miami, a city with a long history of police shootings and ensuing civil unrest, had no police shootings last year, fatal or otherwise, for the first time in 14 years. In Phoenix, where such shootings reached a level over the last several years that far outpaced the rate of much larger cities, deadly police shootings fell sharply in 2003, to their lowest rate in 14 years.
In these cities and in a fast-growing number of the nation's police departments, officers are carrying a slick new weapon, the Taser gun, which looks a lot like a pistol but does not shoot to kill.
Though officials say the Taser gun, which fires a stunning jolt of electricity, is not solely responsible for a decline in police killings, many departments say it has made a huge difference. Its supporters say the Taser is saving lives, protecting officers and suspects in standoffs that might otherwise have left someone dead or seriously injured.
''This is 100 percent more humane,'' said Officer Tom Burns, who has carried a Taser gun for the past two and a half years on bicycle patrol in Seattle.
But as the Taser spreads rapidly, it is raising questions about whether the weapon, which can also be applied directly to the skin as a stun gun, could be abused by the police. The Taser zaps suspects with 50,000 volts of electricity, disabling them for five seconds at a time. Critics say the weapon is ripe for abuse because the shock leaves no obvious mark, other than what looks like a small bee sting. Human rights groups in the United States and abroad have called Tasers potential instruments of torture.
They are now being used by more than 4,000 police departments. Roughly 170 new departments are buying the high-tech electro-shock guns every month, and the Army has begun using them in Iraq, according to Taser International, the Arizona company that makes them. More than one-third of Seattle's 600 patrol officers carry Tasers. In Miami, Phoenix and a growing number of cities, every officer has one.
Tasers have often been introduced in the wake of public outcry over deadly police shootings. That was the case in Seattle, Denver, Austin, Tex., and Portland, Ore., as part of an effort to reduce killings through the use of training programs and ''less lethal'' weapons.
''You have to think about the alternatives,'' said Officer Burns, who also carries pepper spray and a .40-caliber Glock pistol. He said he had used the Taser five times on suspects who seemed eager to attack or were difficult to control. ''And without this technology you might have to break it down to very brutal methods.''
Officer Burns was on the scene in 2000 when the police here shot and killed a mentally ill man, a widely publicized incident that led to soul-searching in the department and a plan that among other things involved the purchase of Tasers.
The newest Tasers are an advanced version of technology that was developed in the 1970's but was not considered by the police to be effective until recently, The electrical pulses travel from the gun through two 21-foot-long wires that look like a stretched-out Slinky tipped with barbed probes. If the probes pierce skin or a layer of clothing two inches thick or less, the jolt contracts the muscles and throws the suspect off balance. It makes the suspect unable to move, and gives the police a full five seconds with every ''tasing'' to handcuff the suspect. The police say that 50,000 volts is a safe amount of electricity to absorb and that suspects shot with a Taser recover immediately.
But critics and watchdog groups say the Taser could be used to torture suspects and prison inmates to extract confessions or taunt them, and Amnesty International has called for a ban on their use pending studies on their long-term effects. Human rights and civil liberties groups are also questioning whether the electro-shocks that Tasers deliver are potentially deadly.
''Surely it's better than being killed,'' said Dan Handelman, a founder of Portland Copwatch, a group that has been critical of that city's growing use of Tasers over the last year. ''But it's not necessarily an acceptable replacement because it's not being used -- at least in Portland -- in place of lethal force, it's being used for compliance.''
Across the country in recent months, several suspects who were shot with Tasers, sometimes repeatedly, have died. But officials said other health problems, like heart conditions and drug overdoses, were the cause.
The American Civil Liberties Union of Colorado urged the Denver Police Department two weeks ago to limit its use of Tasers. The group cited a rising number of deaths nationally, saying 16 suspects in custody had died after being subdued with Tasers or stun guns in 2003, up from 10 in 2002 and 3 in 2001. But none of the deaths were officially attributed to the effect of the weapons.
In Las Vegas, William Lomax, 26, died last month after being arrested and, according to witnesses and the police, shot with a Taser four or five times, which critics of the Police Department said was an excessive use of force. Investigators said that Mr. Lomax had been under the influence of drugs, but that the cause of death was still under investigation.
Marsha Bell, 22, said she saw Mr. Lomax, her cousin, arrested on Feb. 21 at her apartment complex, where he often visited his family. After he had a run-in with security guards, the police were called.
''He was on the ground,'' Ms. Bell said in a telephone interview. ''He had two pairs of handcuffs on him, and I didn't know the Taser was being used until I heard him screaming. He kept screaming and screaming, saying, 'Oh God, Jesus, please no.' He was screaming in pain, he was hurt and he didn't resist.''
Lt. Tom Monahan of the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department, which bought several hundred Tasers last year, said that Mr. Lomax had struggled with officers, security guards and paramedics, and that the Taser was used while officers were trying to handcuff him.
Officer Thomas Miller, who conducts Taser training for the Las Vegas department, said that there were clear guidelines on when Tasers should be used.
''In the past, an officer would have to fight,'' Officer Miller said. ''Now we have an option to stop that before it gets to that point, greatly reducing the risk to the officer and the suspect.''
The police do say that a Taser would never replace lethal weapons if an officer felt his life was in imminent danger, like when a suspect is wielding a knife or a gun at close proximity, or when no other officer is available to provide ''lethal cover'' for an officer using the Taser. Most departments allow officers on the scene to make that judgment call.
In the New York City Police Department, supervisors and members of the large Emergency Service Unit, which helps patrol officers in violent situations, carry Tasers, but patrol officers do not, the police said.
The newest models cost $799 each, according to Taser International, the leading producer of the weapons. But company officials, who have seen their stock skyrocket over the last year, say the savings to police departments that might otherwise be sued over violent confrontations or shootings is potentially huge.
The police and other supporters of the new technology also say there are built-in safeguards to prevent abuse of the guns. Each Taser, which is powered by batteries, has a data port that records each shock and is used by police departments when they prepare incident reports, allowing supervisors to count how many times a Taser was fired.
Steve Tuttle, a spokesman for Taser International, which is based in Scottsdale, Ariz., said the company continually reviewed data and had found few instances among about 70,000 uses so far of abuse or inappropriate use.
''If there's a bad apple out there, the technology we made will catch that bad apple,'' Mr. Tuttle said. ''We've won the lottery in terms of great success, stock market-wise, but with that comes much more scrutiny.''
Officer Burns of the Seattle department said the police could not deny that a misguided officer could abuse any weapon. But he said that there had been numerous instances in Seattle where officers had used the Taser instead of fists, nightsticks, guns or pepper spray, which can have much longer effects than Taser shocks, and that suspects had recovered immediately.
''Shooting someone is not a badge of honor,'' Officer Burns said. ''It's something no one wants to do. No police officer in the world is paid to die, no police officer in the world is paid to get hurt.''
	He had eluded the authorities for years. Witnesses against him had mysteriously disappeared. Shots were fired from his highly secured compound here last year when the state police tried to close in.
The man, John V. Oakes, like a fast-rising number of American Indian drug traffickers across the country, saw himself as ''untouchable,'' as one senior investigator put it, protected by armed enforcers and a code of silence that ruled the reservation.
After he was finally arrested last May, Mr. Oakes was recorded from jail talking on the phone with his estranged wife. ''I can't believe people let this happen to me,'' he said, according to Derek Champagne, the Franklin County district attorney who listened to the recorded call. ''You can't touch me. I'm on the reservation, and I do what I want.''
Investigators described Mr. Oakes as an intimidating trafficker who concentrated on stealing drugs and cash from a prosperous and growing cluster of criminals who, like Mr. Oakes, have built sprawling mansions near worn-down trailers on this reservation straddling the Canadian border.
Law enforcement officials say Mr. Oakes and the drug lords he is accused of stealing from are part of a violent but largely overlooked wave of trafficking and crime that has swept through the nation's Indian reservations in recent years, as large-scale criminal organizations have found havens and allies in the wide-open and isolated regions of Indian country.
In the eyes of law enforcement, reservations have become a critical link in the drug underworld. They have helped traffickers transport high-potency marijuana and Ecstasy from eastern Canada into cities like Buffalo, Boston and New York, and have facilitated the passage of cocaine and methamphetamine from cities in the West and Midwest into rural America.
In some cases, outside drug gangs work with Indian criminals to distribute drugs on Indian and non-Indian lands. And on a growing number of reservations, drug traffickers -- particularly Mexican criminals -- are marrying Indian women to establish themselves on reservations.
At the Lac Courte Oreilles Reservation in northwestern Wisconsin, for instance, several members of the Latin Kings gang married Indian women while a tribal offshoot of the gang built a $3 million crack cocaine ring moving drugs from Milwaukee into and around the reservation over the past few years, prosecutors said.
Increasingly American Indians are breaking away to build their own violent, Mafia-like enterprises, according to an examination of dozens of court records and interviews with more than 50 federal and local prosecutors, tribal law enforcement officials and tribal members.
''This is very serious and has created major problems in the community,'' said Clifford Martel, a former senior police investigator for the Red Lake Nation in northern Minnesota, who was fired in July and said it was because he had tried to rid that reservation of drug traffickers with close ties to powerful tribe members.
''The amount of drugs was really impacting that community, our community, just as if it were Chicago, and big loads were coming in all the time,'' Mr. Martel said.
For traffickers of marijuana, cocaine, methamphetamine, painkillers and people, reservations offer many advantages. Law enforcement is spotty at best. Tribal sovereignty, varying state laws and inconsistent federal interest in prosecuting drug crimes create jurisdictional confusion and conflict.
The deep loyalty that exists within tribes, where neighbors are often related, and the intense mistrust of the American justice system make securing witnesses and using undercover informants extremely difficult. And on some reservations, Indian drug traffickers have close relationships with tribal government or law enforcement officials and enjoy special protection that allows them to operate freely, investigators say.
A Direct Hand in Trafficking
Casino money has also fueled the surge, providing a fast-growing source of customers and well-financed partners for outside drug traffickers. And cutbacks in welfare payments in cities have prompted many Indians to return to reservations, often bringing with them connections to gangs and drug rings.
Some traffickers have given away drugs to Indians as a way of luring them into the trade. The recently convicted leader of a Mexican drug ring had a chilling strategy on five reservations in Wyoming and the Midwest, the authorities said: targeting tribes with high alcohol addiction rates and handing out free methamphetamine, recruiting the newly addicted Indians as dealers and orchestrating romantic relationships between gang members and Indian women.
The surge in drug-related crime stands in sharp contrast to the great strides Indians have made over the past several decades, strengthening their sovereignty and culture, making their way into American politics and government and -- for a small but rising number of tribes -- growing rich with new casino revenue.
At the same time, American Indians like Mr. Oakes have capitalized on the drug trade, carving out a deep piece of the pie for themselves, after decades in which Indians were typically recruited to help non-Indian traffickers smuggle drugs across the borders and through the country.
''They started out solely as mules, then they realized there was an awful lot more profit in dealing directly'' with the upper echelons of organized crime, said Mr. Champagne, the district attorney. ''Why should they just get paid for bringing it across the river?''
Here on Mohawk land, a reservation of roughly 6,000 people on the United States side, according to the tribe, investigators estimate that 10 to 15 major Indian criminal organizations, along with outside drug rings, move more than $1 billion annually in high-grade marijuana and Ecstasy across the Canadian border, through the reservation and into the Northeast. Prosecutors say they are catching only about 2 percent of that contraband.
The drug trade afforded Mr. Oakes a lifestyle that neighbors on this reservation could barely dream of. Stealing from other dealers was inherently dangerous -- as Mr. Champagne said, ''I was surprised that he wasn't going to be my next homicide.'' But for Mr. Oakes the rewards outweighed the risk: He owned a gated compound on the St. Lawrence River, with 16 surveillance cameras, a souped-up Lincoln Navigator and several speedboats.
Yet at his bail hearing Mr. Oakes told a judge that he was supporting himself solely on a Navy pension.
Mr. Oakes eventually pleaded guilty to selling drugs to undercover agents, after investigators seized from the compound 17,000 tablets of Ecstasy, worth $340,000 on the street, two pounds of high-grade marijuana and several shotguns and rifles. But investigators said Mr. Oakes was a prime suspect in at least a dozen robberies of drug traffickers, netting him hundreds of thousands of dollars in cash, cocaine and marijuana. He is expected to be sentenced next month to 10 years in state prison, the authorities said.
The federal government could not provide comprehensive statistics on drug trafficking through reservations. But overall crime figures point to a much higher rate of violence on the nation's 261 federally recognized reservations compared with the rest of the nation. A 2004 Justice Department report found that American Indians and Alaska Natives experienced a per capita rate of violent crime twice that of the United States population. And the number of police officers per capita on Indian reservations is starkly lower than elsewhere in the country, other reports show.
Steven W. Perry, a statistician with the Justice Department and the author of the 2004 report, a 10-year study of crime in Indian country, said the judicial patchwork that covered Indian reservations had made it impossible to provide an accurate statistical portrait. Of the 561 federally recognized Indian tribes, 171 have their own courts, and only 71 have their own jails, Mr. Perry said.
Other federal officials say they are aware, through anecdotal reports and growing concerns reported to them by tribal leaders, of a marked rise in drug trafficking, particularly involving methamphetamine, and crimes like murder and robbery that come in its wake.
''It appears there is a very significant crime problem on most of the reservations that we are aware of,'' said Chris Chaney, deputy bureau director of law enforcement services for the Bureau of Indian Affairs. ''I am concerned that it might be escalating within the last couple of years.''
Addiction, Confusion, Corruption
Although much of the drug trafficking on reservations involves moving the contraband across the nation's borders and from large cities through the states, the drugs often never leave Indian lands.
At the Blackfeet Nation in Browning, Mont., methamphetamine addiction is rampant among the 10,000 members of the tribe, unemployment reaches 85 percent in the winter and drug-related violence is widespread.
''It's destroying our culture, our way of life, killing our people,'' said Darrel Rides at the Door, a drug and alcohol counselor who uses traditional healing therapies, burning sage and sweet grass during ''talking circles,'' to cleanse the soul of the demons of addiction. ''A lot of people, they feel sort of disempowered to do anything about it.''
Local law enforcement officials in Montana, including Jeff Faque, the under sheriff of Glacier County, said that with no jurisdiction over the reservation, they could not stem the large quantities of methamphetamine moving through it in a state with one of the highest rates of meth use in the nation. Mexican gangs based in Washington State are working with Blackfeet Indians and others to traffic methamphetamine into and across Montana, the authorities say.
''It's disheartening,'' Mr. Faque said of his office's lack of legal authority at the Blackfeet Nation. ''I don't think I'll see it solved in my lifetime.''
Addiction and a jurisdictional morass are only two of the problems associated with the expanding drug trade. Corruption is another.
At the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming, a tribal court judge was one of 25 people arrested last May as part of a drug ring accused of moving, over a seven-year period, 30 pounds of methamphetamine, worth more than $1 million, as well as painkillers and marijuana into and through the reservation, said Matthew H. Mead, the United States attorney in Wyoming.
The tribal judge, Lynda Munnell Noah, the sister of one of the drug ring's leaders, was accused of threatening to assault and murder a Bureau of Indian Affairs law enforcement officer, prosecutors said. About half of those arrested have pleaded guilty so far; the judge has pleaded not guilty and is expected to go to trial soon.
At the Red Lake Reservation in northern Minnesota, four former tribal law enforcement officials and the nation's current chairman said in interviews that internal tribal politics and resistance among court and police employees had created enormous obstacles to ridding the reservation of cocaine traffickers.
Investigators say four or five tribal families are controlling the drug trade, most of it in partnership with drug gangs from Minneapolis.
Mr. Martel, the former senior police investigator at Red Lake, which gained widespread attention last March when a teenager killed nine people and himself at the reservation's high school, said he was fired after three years on the force because he clashed with tribal leaders when he tried to investigate suspects. While the federal government and not the state has jurisdiction over Red Lake, tribal detectives like Mr. Martel are typically the first to investigate criminals and to notify federal prosecutors.
Mr. Martel's partner, Russ Thomas, who resigned in October, said Red Lake police dispatchers ''would narc us out,'' or alert suspects to criminal investigations.
Eventually, Mr. Thomas said, he and Mr. Martel stopped telling others in the police department whom they were investigating, worked their cases at night instead of during the day so they would not be spotted as easily, and changed cars often.
''We quit using our own people,'' he said. ''We were doing our job with our hands tied behind our backs.''
Tim Savior, who served only three months as the Red Lake police chief before the Tribal Council voted him out in January, said he, too, felt that drug-fighting efforts were thwarted by lower-level officials in the courts and police department with support from tribal politicians.
''I was trying to hold people accountable for their duties and responsibilities in the department,'' Mr. Savior said. ''Politicians are trying to control it, and without a separation of powers, law enforcement is expendable. That's why there's a tailspin on reservations -- there's no stability there.''
Mr. Martel accused the tribal chairman, Floyd Jourdain Jr., of pressing him to drop investigations of relatives, friends and political associates, and he contended that he was fired when he refused to back off.
But Mr. Jourdain said Mr. Martel was fired for just cause, after portraying himself as an F.B.I. agent during an investigation. Mr. Martel said he was appropriately accompanying an F.B.I. agent, which is standard protocol. The chairman also said there were numerous complaints of rudeness against Mr. Martel and that critics like him were motivated by a political ''smear campaign'' in advance of tribal elections in May.
Mr. Jourdain acknowledged that his reservation had a serious problem with crack cocaine dealers, but he said he had no role in allowing the drug trade to expand. The problem, he said, lies with lower-level law enforcement employees resistant to change, although he said he had no proof of any illegal action that could lead to their firing.
''I've done nothing wrong,'' Mr. Jourdain said. ''I've followed all procedure and gone through the appropriate steps.'' He also said he was disheartened that Mr. Savior had been removed as police chief and had voted against the majority to keep the police chief on.
The United States attorney in Minnesota, Thomas B. Heffelfinger, whose office prosecutes major crimes on the state's reservations, said one of the reasons few drug criminals had been prosecuted at Red Lake was that the tribal leadership, citing concerns over sovereignty, had removed its two police officers, including Mr. Martel after he was fired, from a federal drug crimes task force in the area.
The tribe has yet to sign an agreement it received last fall that would put the Red Lake officers back on the task force, which Mr. Heffelfinger said would go a long way toward cracking down on the drug trade there. The agreement, he said, is ''adequate'' for two other Minnesota tribes, at the White Earth and Leech Lake reservations, where the federal task force's work has led to a series of arrests and prosecutions.
'The Black Hole'
In upstate New York and across the Canadian border, the roughly 11,000 Indians living here now have long dipped their hands into the rewarding till of smuggling, moving goods as varied as diapers and tobacco across this lightly patrolled frontier, 12 wide-open miles of water and land separating the two countries. Some here say that smuggling, dating back to before the days of Prohibition, is a birthright.
While much of the nation's drug enforcement effort has focused on the Mexican border, the reservation has become a pipeline for the flow of drugs and guns between Canada and the United States. In warmer weather, speedboats cruise across the St. Lawrence River, ferrying drugs south and weapons and cash north; in the winter cars and vans race over an ice bridge on the river, the authorities say.
A retired special agent here for the Border Patrol's former antismuggling unit, Edward Barrett, said that when he was working undercover along the Mexican border in Texas, a drug smuggler told him that if he could not move narcotics across the southern border, he could easily do it through Canada and ''the black hole,'' the traffickers' nickname for the Mohawk land. ''It's guaranteed to go through,'' he said.
On the 14,000-acre reservation, evidence of the drug trade is easily visible from the million-dollar mansions with high gates and elaborate fences that are being built in a place with an unemployment rate of about 50 percent, and where tumbledown government housing was once the common sight.
Despite the many obstacles, prosecutors have had some success in combating drug rings here. In November, Lawrence Mitchell, a member of the Mohawk tribe, pleaded guilty to orchestrating the movement of large quantities of marijuana across the United States-Canada border. Numerous times, according to his plea, Mr. Mitchell, 35, arranged for the transportation of loads averaging 50 to 100 pounds, destined for Syracuse, Utica and other parts of New York; Massachusetts; and Florida.
Prosecutors say he also laundered tens of millions of dollars in marijuana trafficking money over three years, through his construction company and car dealership. He was sentenced in November to 10 years in prison.
Mr. Mitchell -- who owned two houses on the reservation, one on each side of the border, until the authorities seized the American house -- earned at least $2.2 million in drug money from 2001 to 2004, investigators say, but the money trail was hard to follow.
Along with Mr. Mitchell, five other people, including a New York State Police dispatcher who was accused of tipping off Mr. Mitchell's drug runners to police presence on the border, have pleaded guilty so far in the case.
Mr. Mitchell's lawyer, Stanley Cohen of New York City, who also represented Mr. Oakes and is best known for representing terrorism suspects, said law enforcement officials had used such arrests to wrongly portray the reservation as infested with drug traffickers. And Mr. Cohen objected to investigators' contentions that his clients were involved in criminal activities that went beyond what they admitted to.
''If they had evidence of more significant or more egregious or more disturbing activity by either of these clients, they would have proved it,'' he said.
Meanwhile, as prosecutors say drug traffickers are doing business in Indian country at a rapidly growing pace, many tribes are responding on their own to the drug crime and addiction epidemic.
At the Mohawk Reservation, the tribe spends more than half the revenue from its casino and other enterprises -- roughly $2 million annually -- on border patrol and other law enforcement. Tribal leaders say they could fight the trafficking here better than outside law enforcement, given adequate resources. ''We feel like that's our responsibility,'' said James W. Ransom, a Mohawk tribal chief. ''That's our goal.''
The Mohawk tribe has received $5,000 annually from the Department of Homeland Security and used the entire grant over the last two years to build a security fence around the new police headquarters, tribal officials said.
Working with stretched resources and huge barriers, many tribal detectives across Indian country say they are facing an impossible task.
''If I were a drug trafficker, I'd choose this place,'' said Brian Barnes, deputy chief of police for the Mohawk tribe, as he headed out on the police department's lone working speedboat to patrol the St. Lawrence River.
Gangs Hit Home
In Wisconsin, Paul DeMain, the managing editor of News From Indian Country, who is married to a member of the Lac Courte Oreilles tribe, confronted the fact that his own son and stepdaughter were initiated members of the Latin Kings. After the gang gained a foothold on the reservation in 1998, Indian criminals set up an affiliate, the Lion Tribe Set, which ran one of the largest crack-cocaine trafficking rings in the history of the state, said John W. Vaudreuil, an assistant United States attorney in Wisconsin. So far, 37 of 40 tribal members have been convicted and sentenced in the case.
Mr. DeMain took the painful step of reporting his son's activities to the authorities, he said. His son left the gang, Mr. DeMain said, but his stepdaughter is serving a 20-year sentence in federal prison.
''It requires reaching out of that little box of self-protection that the Indian community has always had,'' Mr. DeMain said. ''A reluctance to engage in supporting the federal government, to call in outside resources.''
Darrel Hillaire, chairman of the Lummi Nation in Northwest Washington, said, ''We've got to step up.''
''It's not the federal government's fault,'' Mr. Hillaire said. ''It's us, the leaders. Until it becomes the No. 1 priority in Indian country, we'll continue to play this blame game, and we'll get nothing done.''
Still, there is fierce debate over possible solutions: more money from the federal government for manpower, or more legal authority for tribes that insist they know better how to fight crime within their own borders. Mr. Heffelfinger, who is also the chairman of the Native American Issues Subcommittee of the nation's United States attorneys but has just announced that he is stepping down to return to private practice, acknowledged that drug crimes were ''disproportionately high'' on reservations.
But he said tribes with significant casino revenue now had new options for financing drug addiction recovery and law enforcement programs. Many tribes have funneled gambling and other business revenue toward those needs.
Mr. Heffelfinger described crime fighting on the Mohawk Reservation as a ''success story'' because of the recent partnerships between tribal, local, state, federal and Canadian law enforcement agencies, which helped lead to the arrest of traffickers like Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Oakes. But investigators vehemently disagreed that there was anything resembling a success story here.
One afternoon, tribal and county detectives were preparing to take what was their lone speedboat -- they recently obtained another one confiscated from a drug trafficker -- out for a patrol on the St. Lawrence River.
They tried to start the boat, but the battery was dead. They spent hours trying to drag the boat through the mud and up onto a riverbank with a pickup truck. The detectives shook their heads and said they suspected that the traffickers were crossing the river at that very moment, with loads of drugs stashed on their many speedboats.
Tribal Underworld
	For a time, Room 246 at the Scottish Lodge Motel, 13 miles south of the Canadian border, was a Shangri-La for Eugenia Phair.
With its stained carpets, its stench of vomit and stale cigarette smoke, its bathroom sink smudged with burn marks from the crack-cocaine cooks who had used the room before, Room 246 was where her drug smuggling operation began to take off, she said, the first headquarters of what would become a well-organized and lucrative drug ring on and around this reservation.
Over the next few years, Ms. Phair, 26, a Lummi Indian, and her family grew flush and dizzy with drug money, as she rocketed to the top in the ripe and cutthroat world of Indian drug trafficking, selling painkillers, she said, to everyone, including tribal officials and jobless strung-out addicts.
''It was almost an answer to your prayers,'' said Ms. Phair, who was released on Feb. 6 after serving 20 months in state prison. ''If you came from rags and then you had a chance at riches, wouldn't you choose riches? If you lived your whole life in poverty and then you had a chance to be rich, what would you do? It's almost impossible. I never had anything ever, no new clothes, no school-clothes shopping, no nothing at all. Then you're able to have your kids go to a good school and look nice and fit in. I never fit in.''
Ms. Phair was among the scores of traffickers who flourished in an exploding drug trade on Indian lands. They are getting rich on their own neighbors' addictions, capitalizing on gripping poverty or new-found casino wealth and on the weakness of law enforcement in Indian country, according to tribal and other officials and to Ms. Phair, who described her life as the leader of a drug trafficking ring in phone calls, letters and interviews over the past year.
From the earliest days -- as she lived with a boyfriend in one room of the Scottish Lodge while her three children stayed with her father, Eugene, in another -- Ms. Phair learned how easy smuggling was for the coterie of Indian women who worked as mules for her.
The women would cross the border into Canada and buy OxyContin pills on the streets of Vancouver. They hid the pills in condoms inside their vaginas, drove back across the border and delivered them to Ms. Phair, who sold them on and around the reservation for double the buying price.
The Lummi Nation of 4,000 people is a stark land of crabbers, clam diggers and salmon fishermen on the shores of Bellingham Bay in Northwest Washington. It is where Ms. Phair grew up, proud to be Lummi, she said, though the white children at school called her Lummi Dummy. As a child, she was surrounded by addiction, death and crime, and as she grew older she broke the law several times, with felony convictions for robbery, burglary and possession of stolen property.
In her drug-dealing heyday, OxyContin addiction had already become a scourge across the country, and drugs were beginning to rival alcohol as the vice of choice on many reservations. When Ms. Phair was selling pills, the OxyContin trade was exploding here, worth $1.5 million in 2003 alone, tribal officials said, double the profits that year from the tribe's Silver Reef Casino and far more than the flailing salmon industry, once the backbone of the tribe's economy.
She admitted repeatedly that her decision to become a drug dealer victimized her family, as she had to abandon her children when she was sent to prison, and countless others in her own fragile tribe.
''I have more victims than anybody in here,'' she said in an interview from prison. ''My victims are the children whose parents were using the drugs I sold.''
At the peak of her operation, Ms. Phair was running 12 to 15 Lummi women to Canada and back daily, each returning with 60 to 80 pills stuffed inside their bodies. Agents at the border posed few problems, Ms. Phair said. Body cavity searches are rare, the authorities acknowledge, and Ms. Phair said several of her drug runners could talk their way out of the exams by saying that they had been raped or were pregnant and that an exam would be too traumatic.
The cross-border runs were so successful, Ms. Phair said, that at the time of her arrest in June 2004 she was selling up to $30,000 worth of pills a day and clearing up to half of that in profits.
Ms. Phair, who has a tattoo of a pair of bear claws, a symbol of strength in Lummi culture, across her chest, grew up hungry, eating popcorn and canned meat when it was around. Her lone childhood memory of Christmas was finding a dress -- two sizes too small -- and an old wooden truck hastily left under a scrawny tree by her drunken mother.
But by the time she was arrested, two years after investigators began wiretapping her phones at the Scottish Lodge, her children were wearing $200 outfits and playing with expensive dolls -- including one that had its own $100 miniature limousine. Her 4-year-old daughter, Janyha, was enjoying regular manicures and pedicures at a beauty salon. For herself she bought a Ford Expedition and expensive clothes and used drug money to support her gambling habit.
''It's a comforting thing to say that you wanted to quit, but in reality it was more that you had to keep doing it in order to keep a lifestyle you had become accustomed to,'' she said in a call from a pay phone at the Washington State Corrections Center for Women in Gig Harbor. ''You play a lot of mind games with yourself.''
Ms. Phair said she was one of the few in her drug ring, which included her father, Eugene, who did not get sloppy and greedy with drug addiction. She said she did not use the pills, and her relatives said that was true. She was addicted to the cash.
Her father and grandmother, both of whom benefited richly from the enterprise, said in interviews that Ms. Phair was always on top of things. She said she practiced ''dope dealer instincts.''
''You don't get high on your own stuff,'' Ms. Phair said. ''You can't sit here and use the drugs you are selling. You will fall.''
Like Every Mom
A typical day as a drug trafficker, Ms. Phair wrote in one letter, was spent like ''every mom.''
''I would greet my babies in the kitchen,'' she said. ''Janyha would have all the bowls set up. They would all choose their cereal. Janyha would pour the milk because she's a big girl and that's what big girls do.''
Ms. Phair would fix Janyha's hair in curls or in pigtails. Her father would take care of her new infant, Payton, and the twins, Kayani, a girl, and Keonday, a boy. Ms. Phair would take Janyha to day care or preschool.
After dropping her off, she would turn on her cellphone and the dealing frenzy would begin, she said, ''answering call after call,'' driving around in her Expedition, or arranging deals from inside the Lummi casino, where the chaos and noise made it easy to slink around unnoticed.
Ms. Phair described her decision to become a drug dealer as something that occurred in a flash, although she had considered the possibility before.
She had been working at the casino on the swing shift in the cash cage, for $9.50 an hour. But after the twins were born three months premature, she called in sick often and lost her job. Still, she was receiving public assistance.
But she saw that all around her, people on the reservation were making money, hand over fist, running painkillers from Canada. A close friend was doing it, and this friend had a new minivan, a big-screen television, and a full refrigerator.
''I wanted those things,'' she said. ''I wanted my daughter to have the $500 Barbie truck, the twins to have things that would help them learn to crawl.''
One day in the summer of 2001, Ms. Phair scraped together $300 and persuaded a friend to drive her over the border and drop her off in a drug-infested neighborhood in downtown Vancouver. There, she saw drug dealers in BMW's, and everyone was selling. All she had to do was ask anybody who came along, ''Do you know somebody who has 50 80's?'' meaning 80-milligram OxyContin tablets, known as ''green monsters,'' in the illegal drug trade. Someone always did.
That first day in Canada, Ms. Phair said, she bought 25 pills and smuggled them back to the reservation in a tattered bra, hand-me-down socks and cheap shoes from the Family Bargain Store. She sold all the pills on the reservation in one afternoon for $750, more than doubling her money.
The Mules
When she started out at the Scottish Lodge in the fall of 2002, Ms. Phair paid her mules $100 a run, according to court records. But she said that as her operation grew she paid the women, all from a reservation with an unemployment rate hovering around 60 percent at the time, $600 a run. For a few hours of work, they were making double what Ms. Phair had received in monthly welfare checks.
But as the authorities began to get wise to the smuggling -- border agents said they noticed that women were walking with a limp or a waddle -- Ms. Phair's mules proposed hiding the drugs in powwow ''gear,'' the sacred spiritual paraphernalia that Indians carry with them across international borders for gatherings.
Other smugglers often used that strategy, Ms. Phair said, knowing that border agents had been instructed to treat the religious items delicately.
But Ms. Phair said she drew the line at hiding drugs in the gear. She was stern with her small army of smugglers, she said, telling them she refused to insult her Creator by hiding drugs in holy regalia. ''That would be like rolling a joint with the Bible,'' she said.
The competition among the Indian organizations smuggling drugs from Canada to the Lummi reservation was feverish, Ms. Phair said. Other drug gangs, she said, would try to lure her mules into their operations by offering them more money or threatening to turn them into border authorities. Some had connections to the tribal government, she contended, and could act on tips from the Lummi police of impending drug raids.
So she scrutinized her mules closely.
''You have to be able to be in a room of complete strangers and analyze everybody,'' she said. ''You can't be wasted on drugs. You can't sit here and make a drug deal in front of 100 people and make mistakes.''
As her operation took off, she used drug money to send her three older children to private preschool, karate classes and hairdressers. She filled the refrigerators of her relatives and bought them wood in the winter.
''Janyha was always dressed to the nines,'' Ms. Phair's father said.
On the reservation, Ms. Phair was a well-known dealer, according to her, her relatives and court documents. Among her customers, she said, were tribal government officials. The Lummi Nation chairman, Darrel Hillaire, said that although OxyContin and other drugs were ravaging his people, he doubted that Ms. Phair had sold it to any high-level tribal officials. He acknowledged, however, that Ms. Phair might have sold drugs to some of the hundreds of people who work for the tribe.
Her buyers, Ms. Phair said, included a couple whose 2-year-old died after eating OxyContin pills off a carpet, a well-publicized death on the reservation that set off an alarm within the tribal government. It vowed to banish drug dealers from the tribe.
The couple, Ms. Phair said, later tried to trade her the dead baby's clothes -- a tiny down jacket, socks still on their Kmart plastic hangers and a batch of unused diapers in an open box, all of it stuffed into a black garbage bag -- for OxyContin. She turned them down, she said.
''That went back into my spiritual belief,'' she said. ''It's like putting death on your child. Nobody should have those clothes. I almost puked when they talked to me.'' She added, ''That's when I wanted to quit. That made me physically sick. That's sick. I said, 'Your baby just died,' and they didn't care. They didn't even really fathom it; they didn't think anything was wrong.''
She refused to sell OxyContin to the couple, she said, but she continued selling drugs to others. And she would let her father, a crabber with an appetite for beer and her right-hand man, sell Green Monsters for $80 apiece, $20 more than her price, to support his own habit.
''It was a great life,'' Mr. Phair, 50, said in an interview at his mother's small and cluttered house on the reservation, where he was living after spending a year in the county jail for his part in his daughter's drug ring. ''The money -- the kids always had everything they wanted, everybody was happy, nobody was hungry. We weren't out there beating ourselves on the water.''
Ms. Phair also gave pills to her grandmother, Mavis Revey, 69, who also recently served jail time for selling OxyContin, although she was not working with Ms. Phair.
She recalls growing up eating ''commodity food'' -- noodles and cheese, peanuts, canned peaches and fruit cocktail -- goods provided by the government. But sometimes there was no food, Ms. Phair said, and when she was as young as 7, ''in order for me to quit complaining that there was no food, my mother would get me drunk.''
Her earliest memories include witnessing a drunken altercation between her parents, one of many that led to their breakup. She remembers riding around in an old station wagon during that fight and fixating on the image of a Ranier beer can, one of dozens scattered inside the car, with its curvy big red ''R'' logo.
Her mother would try to placate her with presents, she said, including a kitten.
''I loved that kitten,'' she wrote in one letter, making the kind of spelling and grammatical mistakes she did not make after receiving her high school equivalency diploma in prison. ''But one day it scrached me and I killed it. I was just a little girl! And I rember that I was so unimportant to everyone and no one payed any attention to me that I packed that dead cat around for four days before anyone noticed it was dead.''
As a teenager she got into plenty of trouble. She served two years of juvenile detention beginning when she was 13, for several crimes, including stabbing a man who was trying to rape a relative, she said, and fleeing with his car. At the age of 24, Ms. Phair was arrested for her OxyContin trafficking operation after she sold painkillers to an undercover investigator.
Web of Pain
Ms. Phair said it herself many times, that her drug operation was like an octopus whose tentacles wrapped around dozens of people: the drug mules willing to do anything for the cash; her troubled father and grandmother; the addicts in her tribe; the Lummi foster mother who cared for Ms. Phair's three oldest children while she was in prison -- themselves victims of the drug epidemic in Indian country.
Ms. Phair's husband, Joel DeRusha, 26, whom she married in 2003, is serving the last two years of a four-year prison term for cocaine and weapons possession unrelated to her drug ring. His brother and sister-in-law are caring for Payton, who lives the life Ms. Phair said she wanted, with a stay-at home mother, a family that goes to Disneyland on vacations. Payton, the baby she had with Mr. DeRusha, calls his aunt ''Mommy.''
''I call it dominoes,'' said the sister-in-law, Carole Foldenhauer. ''One person starts off in one direction, and how many dominoes fall based on that?''
Payton was only a few months old when his mother was sent to prison. He has just begun to see her again over the last few weeks. Mrs. Foldenhauer said that when she drives by any McDonald's with Payton, where he visited with his mother recently, Payton shouts or sings, ''Gena, Gena, Gena!''
Ms. Phair's father and grandmother said they believed that Ms. Phair would be easily lured back into drug trade.
''When you're doing time,'' her father said, ''it's kind of like a dream. You're under a pink cloud. You got all these things you want to change and then you get out,'' but ''I think she'll probably have to go back to selling drugs.''
And temptations and struggles have already arisen.
A week before she was released, Ms. Phair's husband called from prison and asked her if she would ''help out a friend'' who was getting out of jail soon by contacting her old connections in the drug world.
''He's supposed to be in my camp,'' she said after the conversation, vowing to divorce him because of it. ''This is the last place I expected this to come from. I can't lose focus now.''
After that, Ms. Phair cut off contact with both her husband and mother-in-law, whom she had called ''Mom'' and who once symbolized the white, middle-class world she long believed would rescue her from her past.
Mr. DeRusha said he only suggested she make the telephone calls to comfort her because she seemed ''stressed out'' about money. Ms. Phair said the implication was that she could possibly get a small take from drug deals the friend would make.
Mr. DeRusha said he was baffled by her reaction. So was his mother, Margaret, who visited Ms. Phair in prison over more than a year, sent clothing, bubble bath and cosmetics to a work release program where she spent the last two months of her sentence and was preparing to order a new bed so Ms. Phair could come live with her.
''She turned from sweet Gena to ice cold snake,'' Mrs. DeRusha said. ''I've done nothing but help her. Why would she treat me like this?''
Facing Banishment
Ms. Phair took a temporary job working for the Lummi Nation. But because she is a convicted drug dealer she faces banishment, which would bar her from working for the tribe, living on the reservation or receiving financial assistance from the Lummi. She is assigned to a grim but sacred task for the tribe: digging up the bones of ancestors, centuries-old skeletons that were discovered several years ago during the construction of a waste-treatment plant.
When she found that her three older children were leaving foster care four months early and would be living with her, she applied for food stamps but was denied, she said, because her $10-an-hour salary, in addition to disability payments for her sickly younger daughter, made her ineligible. For now, she is living with the three children at her sister Misty's in Bellingham, on a waiting list for government housing.
Payton will continue to live with his aunt and uncle, which is a relief to Ms. Phair, she said. Still, she is essentially back at Square One: earning only 50 cents an hour more than she was making at the casino right before she became a drug dealer. She is living in cramped quarters with her three children, with barely enough money to even think about how to clothe them, let alone in anything fancy, she said.
But she insists she has left the life of drug trafficking for good.
''I've learned what happiness is and how I confused it with material things,'' she wrote in her last letter from prison. ''I'm not afraid by any means that I will go back to selling drugs because that will never happen.''
In early January, Ms. Phair saw her father for the first time since she was imprisoned. With Misty along to accompany her on a day pass from work release, she visited him at her grandmother's house, where he was still living, still crabbing and scraping by, still drinking.
She and her father did not hug, and she said that was typical.
They chatted for a while. She asked him if she looked fat, and he told her he got really fat the last time he was in jail. He found a picture of Janyha in his room, an almost life-size, three-dimensional photograph Ms. Phair bought for $150 when she was trafficking, and gave it to her. Her eyes lit up, a flash of the old life before her, and she clutched the photo tightly, eager to take it back to her sparse room in Bellingham. They smoked a cigarette on the back porch; he was hiding from the tribal authorities and did not want to be seen out front, he said.
As she left, her father said, ''Call me later, Gena, like around 6?''
''I can't, Dad,'' she said. ''I don't have any quarters.''
Tribal Underworld
	