The ''Beast of Broadway,'' as the tabloids call him, a successful actor, has been accused of sexually abusing a 15-year-old girl. But his grade-school teacher would be proud of him in at least one respect: He is a good speller.
That much was clear in the two and-a-half page written statement he gave the police after he was arrested, a statement that recounted a behind-the-scenes theater tour for the girl. He wrote these words voluntarily despite a constitutional right to remain silent that is ingrained not only in criminal law, but also in popular culture. But he was hardly the only person arrested in New York in recent years who opened up once the cuffs went on.
A former Women's Wear Daily writer, accused of disguising himself in a firefighter's costume and sexually assaulting a former colleague on Halloween, kept detectives spellbound with his disquisitions on Chinese menus and book rights.
A homeless man accused of stabbing a tourist as he rode with his girlfriend on the subway found that words weren't enough. Asked to sign his confession, he instead sketched a cartoon version of his crime: a pair of lovers' faces -- one happy and one sad -- and a stormy black cloud floating over a subway train.
Such statements -- and occasional illustrations -- by defendants in New York City courts are one element of what prosecutors call the V.D.F., more formally known as the People's Voluntary Disclosure Form. To read them is to experience a kind of poetry of everyday criminal life in New York City.
By turns raw, ugly, poignant, defiant, rarely remorseful and almost always damaging, the statements are a window into the criminal process, part of the common language between detectives and suspects.
''It's kind of like the literature of the criminal defendant,'' said Gerald L. Shargel, a criminal defense lawyer. ''The information contained on the V.D.F. is much more rich and colorful than anything the defense lawyer provides.''
Because they can be so revealing, the V.D.F.'s are a bane of defense lawyers' existence, and they often try to suppress them so they cannot be used in court.
More technically, the Voluntary Disclosure Form is a rough, preliminary summary of the evidence, which the prosecution is required to give to the defense. There is space for prosecutors to type out information like the date, place and time of the ''occurrence.''
And there is space for detectives to provide statements made by defendants at the time of arrest, either as summarized by the police, or in the defendant's own writing.
For many people, the urge to explain, if not to confess, is as urgent as it was for Raskolnikov in ''Crime and Punishment.''
''My name is Paul Cortez,'' is the Melvillian first sentence of the V.D.F. statement handwritten by Mr. Cortez, a yoga teacher who is awaiting trial as the suspect in the fatal stabbing of a dancer in her Upper East Side apartment.
What follows is a three-page roller coaster ride of love, sex and betrayal, culminating in an alibi. On the day of the victim's death, Mr. Cortez wrote, ''I knew something was wrong, so I called back several times.'' When she didn't answer, he called clients, watched a football game with a friend, ''then read a little and went to bed. The next morning about 10:30 I found out from my mom Catherine was Dead.''
The last word, ''Dead,'' is capitalized for emphasis.
Prosecutors love to have defendants volunteer an alibi because it shows what they call ''consciousness of guilt.''
Stacey Richman, a criminal defense lawyer, summed up her advice to any accused who may feel the urge to chat: ''You have a right to remain silent. Exercise that right.''
When Peter Braunstein, the former Women's Wear Daily writer, was arrested in Memphis in December 2005, he seemed, in one of many Hamlet-like moments, torn about talking. ''I really don't think I should talk to you,'' Mr. Braunstein began, according to his V.D.F. ''I think I should do the whole lawyer thing.''
And then he kept talking.
''Everybody talks,'' said Daniel J. Castleman, chief of investigations for the Manhattan district attorney. ''Almost nobody doesn't talk. And the reason for that is that people think they can either talk their way out of it or mitigate the crime. It's human nature.''
Mr. Braunstein, who is in a mental hospital awaiting trial on charges of kidnapping and sexual abuse, seemed to delight in his celebrity. ''Defendant referred to book and movie deals using the name of the complainant several times,'' the V.D.F. says.
He fantasized about ordering Chinese food. ''Defendant stated that after seeing news reports, if he went to a Chinese restaurant, he should order something other than beef with extra mustard because that is what the wanted poster says he orders, but if he did that, it would be too obvious, so he would order beef with extra mustard, but he had not eaten Chinese food for a while.''
Mr. Braunstein did not sign anything, unlike James Barbour, the actor called the ''Beast of Broadway,'' who once played the Beast in ''Beauty and the Beast.'' Mr. Barbour wrote his statement in block letters, correctly spelled, indented and punctuated it, and signed it with a flourish.
Accused of having a sexual relationship with a 15-year-old girl, he wrote, ''She told me that she was 16.''
Unfortunately for Mr. Barbour, the age of consent in New York is 17.
''That evening we went to a Broadway show, 'George Gershwin Alone,' '' wrote Mr. Barbour, who is free on $10,000 bail. ''I introduced her to the star of the show, gave her a backstage tour. The relationship stopped suddenly because I thought it was inappropriate and could get dangerous.''
Defendants may try to talk their way out of a charge, but do they succeed?
''Never,'' said Gerald B. Lefcourt, who has defended clients from the Black Panthers to Harry B. Helmsley. ''Which is why if it's up to me, every client I have should know they should never, ever, under any circumstances speak to law enforcement unless I'm there.''
What Joseph Weir, accused of groping feet on the subway, lacked in spelling skills, he made up for with an almost Gallic appreciation for women. ''I complyment woman, I bow down to them, sometime I kiss there feet and grab legs.'' Mr. Weir, charged with sex abuse, coercion and other less than gallant acts, is due back in court on Jan. 19.
Alexis Quinlin, a swindler posing as a French photographer, actually wrote his statement in French, perhaps casting doubt on those who would contend that the police put words in the mouths of criminals.
''Je m'appelle Alexis Quinlin,'' wrote Mr. Quinlin, who was convicted of grand larceny and sentenced to up to seven and a half years in prison, but was not lying about being French. He described how he signed a contract under the assumed name of Jean Baptiste Mondino, which was, he admitted, ''une grave erreur.''
Robert De Niro's housekeeper, Lucyna Turyk-Wawrynowicz, accused of stealing clothes and jewelry from her wealthy employers, made the mistake of giving the police shopping tips. ''Anybody can buy a jacket like this at Century 21,'' Ms. Turyk-Wawrynowicz said after she was taken into custody in June 2005, according to a transcript typed by the police.
An hour later, she was insulting Mr. De Niro's wife, Grace Hightower, saying, ''She is mean.''
After about three hours, she announced, ''The diamonds are in the bathroom.''
After requesting a Starbucks skim latte from the detectives questioning her, she threw in the towel.
''I am evil and guilty, but my husband did nothing,'' she said. ''You can cut my hands and head off, but I can tell you he did nothing wrong.'' She pleaded guilty to grand larceny and last February was sentenced to up to three years in prison.
Others get right to the point.
''I hate Sammy,'' Kristina Caban said of the man she was accused of branding with an ''R,'' as if he were a bull, according to the police transcript. ''He raped me two years ago.'' Ms. Caban, charged with assault with intent to disfigure permanently, is due back in court on Jan. 11.
Civil libertarians have called for police interrogations to be videotaped. ''We've had reports from clients who say they wrote something, but the police officers were dictating it,'' said Seymour W. James Jr., the lawyer in charge of the criminal practice at the Legal Aid Society. ''They're intimidated by the police after hours of questioning.''
Sometimes, it takes very little prompting for a defendant to put her foot in her mouth. In her V.D.F., Andrea Schwartz, whom the tabloids have termed ''the Brazilian madam,'' is quoted telling the police as she was arrested: ''I'm not a prostitute. I just hook guys up with girls if they want them.''
That did not stop prosecutors from indicting her on prostitution charges last June. She is awaiting trial.
Editors' Note:  January 25, 2007, Thursday  A front-page article on Jan. 5 about the tendency of criminal suspects in New York City to give revealing and usually damaging statements to the police, despite their right to remain silent, included excerpts from the statement of James Barbour, a Broadway actor accused of sexually abusing a 15-year-old girl. According to his statement, Mr. Barbour told the police that he had lain on a bed with the girl and that they had kissed.
But the article should have made it clear that in the statement, Mr. Barbour does not admit or confess to having sexually assaulted the girl, and that he has pleaded not guilty.
	When prosecutors arrested Yoko Ono's chauffeur in December, they said he was a disgruntled, potentially violent employee trying to extort money from her.
But yesterday, the chauffeur's letter asking for money was released for the first time, and it turned out to be a tormented account of passion, romance, sex and humiliation, with the demand for money just one part.
The chauffeur, Koral Karsan, 50, said that he had been not just Ms. Ono's driver, but her lover as well, and that his marriage and self-esteem and ultimately their love affair had been destroyed by her mood swings, dependency and abusive behavior.
In the first paragraph of the two-page, typewritten, single-spaced letter, Mr. Karsan wrote, ''As you know, I have loyally served you in many capacities as your driver, bodyguard, assistant, butler, nurse, handyman and more so your lover and confidant over the last 10 years.''
Elliot Mintz, a spokesman for Ms. Ono, who is 73, denied yesterday that she and Mr. Karsan had had a sexual relationship. ''All of that is untrue,'' he said. He acknowledged that the publicity had possibly hurt Ms. Ono's reputation, but said she did not regret going to the police.
''She certainly feels awful, and has absolutely no second thoughts about proceeding in the manner that she did,'' Mr. Mintz said. ''It is an extortion letter. She does not pay blackmail or extortion fees.''
Mr. Mintz declined to comment on other details of Mr. Karsan's letter, except to say that they differed in some small ways from the draft of the letter he had seen.
Mr. Karsan wrote that he had contacted a lawyer about suing Ms. Ono for sexual harassment as a ''quid pro quo'' for her mistreatment of him. In the last sentence of the letter, he said he deserved $2 million as compensation for his pain and suffering, and would drop his plans for a lawsuit if Ms. Ono paid him.
Prosecutors say that Mr. Karsan read the letter to Ms. Ono in her apartment at the Dakota on Dec. 8, the 26th anniversary of the killing of her husband, John Lennon, by a crazed fan. They have characterized it as an extortion letter, saying that Mr. Karsan threatened to release embarrassing tapes and photos and to kill Ms. Ono if she did not pay him $2 million so he could return to his native Turkey.
Prosecutors had so far released only small excerpts from the letter.
But Mr. Karsan's lawyer, Robert Gottlieb, filed what he said was the full text yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan as part of a bail application for Mr. Karsan, who has been jailed since his arrest on Dec. 13. In the bail application, Mr. Gottlieb suggested that if Mr. Karsan had hired a lawyer to write a more ''artful'' version of the letter, he might never have been accused of a crime.
''We respectfully submit that this letter is not the damaging piece of evidence the People represented it to be,'' Mr. Gottlieb wrote to Justice Daniel P. FitzGerald, who is to hear the bail application tomorrow.
The district attorney's office declined to comment yesterday.
The letter, dated December 2006, begins on a formal note -- ''Dear Ms. Ono.'' Over 10 years, Mr. Karsan wrote, ''our relationship has also deepened into a very emotional and physical one as well.''
But he accused Ms. Ono of destroying his marriage and his self-esteem.
''Your systematic and continuous physical and psychological abuse has caused me to become a different person, stripped of any kind of dignity and self-respect,'' he wrote. ''My wife has now left me because of the relationship between you and me.''
Mr. Karsan wrote that Ms. Ono made him work more than 15 hours a day, seven days a week, obliging him to wait until she was out of the country to take his wife to the doctor or have an engagement party for his son.
He wrote that in pursuing his lawsuit, he would call people who would testify to ''things that will shock the world.'' His list included ''Paul,'' which seemed to mean Paul McCartney; Ms. Ono's son, Sean Lennon; her daughter, Kyoko, from her previous marriage to Anthony Cox; Jann Wenner, the editor of Rolling Stone; and her neighbors at the Dakota.
Mr. Karsan said he would write books revealing such personal details as Sean Lennon's telling a girlfriend that his father was a wife beater.
He said he would repeat Ms. Ono's critical remarks about people ranging from her children and the Beatles to Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and Mr. Mintz.
''If you want all of these pictures, recordings, e-mails, conversations and memories to vanish from the face of the earth and never hear from me again, all you have to do is send me a certified cashier's check from a New York bank for a total amount of $2 million,'' the letter says in its last sentence. It is signed, ''Thank you very much, Koral Karsan.''
Mr. Karsan does not threaten physical violence. But prosecutors have said that he made such threats in a subsequent meeting with Ms. Ono's lawyer.
Mr. Gottlieb told the judge that after Mr. Karsan was arrested, he and his wife, Nazan, reconciled, and that she ''fully supports him.'' He said Mr. Karsan had no interest in fleeing the country, because his son was to be married in New York in February, and he ''desperately wants to be present at and take part in his son's wedding day.''
In the letter, Mr. Karsan suggested that even strangers knew about his affair with Ms. Ono, and that it had ruined his reputation. ''Additionally, our relationship both in the public eye and private has caused a significant degree of defamation to my character,'' Mr. Karsan wrote. ''People, including your own son and daughter, have voiced their opinions regarding our relationship.
''Every day I endure countless demeaning looks and comments from people at work, on the street and most painfully at home. This continues and will continue to cause indescribable pain for me and more importantly my family.''
	The son of an Upper East Side landlord accused of killing his wife in 2005 by stabbing her more than 40 times testified on behalf of his father yesterday, telling the story of a marriage that unraveled into madness.
For most of his life, the son, Marcus Odierno, 25, told a jury, his was a fairly happy family. The Odiernos vacationed in Florida and the Caribbean and welcomed relatives and friends to their town house on East 84th Street for Christmas and Thanksgiving.
But in 1997, things changed, he said. His parents stopped inviting anyone over. His mother ordered one of his friends out of the house because she found his cologne too strong, Mr. Odierno said, and began browbeating her family.
''My mother did not want anybody in the house anymore,'' he said in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
As the first defense witness, Mr. Odierno said that it was his father, Ben Odierno, 72, who was being abused, and his mother, Christine Odierno, 57, who was the abuser -- not the other way around, as the prosecution has argued.
In many ways, it was a portrait of an ordinary marriage, with fights over household chores. But the conflicts somehow veered into violence.
He said that in the fall of 1997, his mother kicked his father out of their bed, forcing him to sleep in a twin bed in the children's room. The bed had been vacated by Marcus's older brother, Stephan, then 18, who had moved to a nearby apartment when he went to college. While Ben Odierno shopped and cooked, Mrs. Odierno called him a slob and a lazy bum, their son said, and frequently taunted him, saying, ''Piggy, piggy, oink, oink.''
Marcus Odierno said his mother began acting as if she were being abused, even though she was not. He said she would slam into him, Stephan or their father and yell: ''Get your hands off me! Don't touch me! You're hurting me!'' Then, he said, she would open the glass doors to the solarium ''and scream these accusations out into the backyard,'' for the neighbors to hear.
In the last year of her life, he said, Mrs. Odierno would hold a knife to her own throat and ask her husband and sons, ''What are you going to do, are you going to slit my throat?''
Jack Litman, Ben Odierno's defense lawyer, asked, ''Do you remember what knife she used?''
''Sure,'' Marcus Odierno said. ''She used a sharp salad knife.''
Mr. Litman contends that on April 24, 2005, Mrs. Odierno turned that knife against her husband, stabbing him. He has said that his client reacted by grabbing another knife and stabbing his wife in self-defense. Mrs. Odierno ended up dead, stabbed in the heart.
Prosecutors say that Ben Odierno killed his wife in a rage because she had given him separation papers, and then stabbed himself in the abdomen.
Marcus Odierno's former girlfriend Allegra Lugo also testified yesterday, saying she had seen Mrs. Odierno yell that she was being abused when she was not.
Marcus Odierno said that while he and his father slept, his mother would come into their room and wake them by rummaging through the closet or turning off the air-conditioning. In the mornings, he said, she would lock herself in the bathroom for hours, refusing to get out when he needed to get ready for school.
Marcus Odierno said that his mother, who had never cursed around him before, became more and more foul-mouthed in the last year of her life, and accused her husband of cheating on her.
In the months before his wife's death, Ben Odierno lost about 50 pounds, but remained ''docile'' despite his wife's abuse, their son said.
When the jury was out of the room, Mr. Litman and his fellow counsel, Todd Terry, told the judge, Justice Gregory Carro, that Marcus Odierno had begun to suspect that his father had Alzheimer's disease.
In another conference with the judge, the prosecutor, Kerry O'Connell, said Mrs. Odierno had begun shunning her husband and sons not because she was mentally ill, but because she loathed them.
Under cross-examination, Marcus Odierno said he had been kicked out of high school for bad grades, and conceded that he was living on money provided by his father.
''Would it be fair to say that your days were spent doing whatever leisure activities you wanted to do?'' Ms. O'Connell asked him.
''Pretty much,'' he said.
Was it true, Ms. O'Connell asked, that his mother managed the family's real estate business, keeping the books, paying the taxes and dealing with city agencies? It was, he said.
Ms. O'Connell asked whether his mother had also given him money.
''My mother refused to give me money,'' he said.
Correction:  February 3, 2007, Saturday  An article last Saturday about the murder trial of Ben Odierno, a Manhattan landlord accused of killing his wife, Christine, referred incorrectly to her injuries and to a defense witness, Allegra Lugo. According to prosecutors, Mrs. Odierno had more than 40 injuries on her body, including scrapes, cuts, bruises and stab wounds; she was not stabbed more than 40 times. Ms. Lugo is a former girlfriend of the Odiernos' son Stephan -- not of his brother, Marcus. The article also misstated a point made by a prosecutor, Kerry O'Connell. She said that Mr. Odierno and his sons loathed Mrs. Odierno, not the other way around.
	