JOHN STAFFEN, who as a senior creative executive at DDB Worldwide helped produce familiar campaigns for advertisers like Hershey Foods and McDonald's, is joining an agency seeking to reverse its flagging fortunes, the New York office of Arnold Worldwide.
The hiring of Mr. Staffen, effective today, is the latest example of the steps Madison Avenue will take in uncertain times to attract new clients and keep current ones content. It also typifies the recent ferment in the executive suites of major agencies, as underlined yesterday by the abrupt firing of Nigel Carr, a managing partner at Kirshenbaum Bond & Partners, after more than a dozen years there.
Mr. Staffen, 43, resigned in October from the New York office of DDB Worldwide, part of the Omnicom Group, where he had been one of two executive creative directors. At the time, he gave no explanation for the decision. In an interview yesterday, Mr. Staffen said he had concluded ''it was time to move on, because it was time for a change -- for me as well as for DDB.''
The latter point was a reference to a decision last January by Lee Garfinkel, the new chairman and chief creative officer at DDB New York, to hire John Russo as a second executive creative director for the office. Before that, Mr. Staffen had been the sole person with that title.
''Maybe four times at DDB New York is enough,'' Mr. Staffen said, laughing, as he counted his stints there: from 1984 to 1989, 1990 to 1995, 1996 to 1999 and 2000 to 2003. (In 1999 and 2000 he was at the agency's Chicago office, creating ads for the McDonald's Corporation.)
At the New York office of Arnold Worldwide, part of the Arnold Worldwide Partners division of Havas, Mr. Staffen will have the title of creative director, overseeing work for clients like the Bermuda Department of Tourism, GlaxoSmithKline, Hasbro, the United States Tennis Association and Welch Foods.
Mr. Staffen will be taking over the duties of Rochelle Klein, who was vice chairwoman and chief creative officer for three years before leaving unexpectedly in November. A statement from the agency at that time attributed her departure to creative differences with other executives.
Ms. Klein's leaving came after Arnold New York fell short in several high-profile reviews, failing to land assignments from the Andrew Jergens division of the Kao Corporation, Pfizer and Travelocity. It also followed a decision by Welch to place its account, with billings estimated at $20 million to $30 million, in review after more than two decades at Arnold New York and predecessor agencies.
''After Rochelle made her decision to move on, we set about to find the ideal person to be the New York creative director,'' said Mary Baglivo, president of Arnold New York, ''and a lot of hands went up in the air.''
''John turned out to be the lead standout'' candidate, she added, ''and it's great that he was available and up for this challenge, this opportunity, we have ahead of us.''
As Arnold New York has struggled, one large client at the Boston headquarters, the Monster division of Monster Worldwide, left for Deutsch in New York, owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, while a second, Fidelity Investments, placed its account in review. And Havas, Arnold's parent, began a reorganization that included the scaling back of ambitious plans to expand Arnold overseas.
''We've had a history of our accounts not churning, but recently things have happened to us,'' said Ron Lawner, chairman and chief creative officer at Arnold in Boston, ''and we now have to deal with it.''
''You need to find the players to do that -- creative adults, I call them -- who can put their arms around all different kinds of clients,'' Mr. Lawner said, ''and John has done that, in areas where the degree of difficulty is fairly high.''
There are significant risks in recruiting an outsider to help in turning around Arnold New York, as shown by numerous examples of executives parachuting in to agencies where they had never worked before who failed to achieve their goals and were forced to resign or even fired.
Such examples were ''very much on my mind,'' Mr. Lawner said, ''so the person had to be the right person, with people skills, with the right credentials, to command respect, to be able to lead.''
Mr. Staffen said he was ''aware of the challenges'' confronting outsiders and their generally poor track record.
''It's something I've talked a lot about for a long time'' with Mr. Lawner and Ed Eskandarian, Arnold's chief executive, he added. ''They know in New York and Boston that they've gone through a rocky time, and I see commitment from the top that they've got to refocus, and me coming is part of it.''
Of course, not all problems at agencies involve newcomers, as demonstrated yesterday by the sudden dismissal of Mr. Carr by Jonathan Bond and Richard Kirshenbaum, the co-chairmen of the Kirshenbaum Bond Creative Network in New York. The three had worked together since June 1991, when Mr. Nigel was hired as the first director for brand planning at the Kirshenbaum Bond & Partners division. He was promoted to partner in 1992 and managing partner in 1995.
Mr. Bond and Mr. Kirshenbaum said in a brief statement that Mr. Carr had been ''terminated from his position, effective immediately.'' They declined to elaborate. Mr. Carr did not respond to a voice mail message left at his office in San Francisco, where since 1997 he had been general manager of a division known as Kirshenbaum Bond & Partners West. An employee who answered the phone said he was ''out of the office and no longer works here.''
A new management team in San Francisco, including Noel Cottrell, managing partner and executive creative director, is to be named Friday, the statement said. The change is part of a reorganization centered on the dissolving of Kirshenbaum Bond & Partners West as a separate division and the reconfiguration of Kirshenbaum Bond & Partners as an agency with offices in New York and San Francisco.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING  Correction:  January 8, 2004, Thursday  The Advertising column in Business Day yesterday, about the hiring of John Staffen at the New York office of Arnold Worldwide, misstated his title. It is executive creative director, not creative director.
	A RESTAURANT chain known for its irreverent advertising, Chipotle Mexican Grill, has hired the new New York office of an irreverent British agency, Mother, to create its campaigns.
Chipotle, majority owned by McDonald's, will formally announce the hiring of Mother today. Chipotle, with about 300 stores that compete in the rapidly growing segment of the restaurant business known as fast-casual Mexican, has previously produced its print, outdoor and radio ads internally.
The chain's sensibility is typified by a billboard that shows an oversized Chipotle (pronounced chi-POAT-lay) foil-wrapped burrito and asks: ''Burrito? Or body pillow?'' and by an animated image on its Web site (www.chipotle.com) that shows an employee being buried under a barrage of burritos.
Chipotle, which spends an estimated $8 million to $10 million a year on all marketing communications aimed at consumers, becomes the first advertiser to hire the Mother New York office as its creative agency of record. Before New Year's, the National Basketball Association named the office to work on a creative project, centered on promoting viewership of and attendance at the league's playoff games.
Madison Avenue has been closely monitoring the progress -- or perceived lack thereof -- at the Mother New York office, the first outpost for the agency outside London. The office has had what is known in retailing as a soft opening; that is, a low-key, informal start-up during the last few weeks rather than a big, splashy one with ribbon-cuttings and speeches. The announcement of the Chipotle account is intended as a signal that the office is open for business.
Mother is one of the hottest agencies in the competitive British advertising market. Since it was founded seven years ago, it has landed assignments from blue-chip advertisers like the Boots drugstore chain, Coca-Cola, Diageo, Orange telecommunications and Unilever.
But whether the charmingly cheeky tone of its output will gain favor in the United States -- among consumers as well as potential clients -- is a question that is difficult to answer, particularly in an uncertain economy for the advertising industry when established agencies are struggling.
''It's a tough challenge,'' said John Staffen, who started yesterday as the executive creative director at the New York office of Arnold Worldwide, part of the Arnold Worldwide Partners division of Havas. Agencies based in other American cities that have opened offices in New York have found it hard to flourish, Mr. Staffen said, much less agencies with headquarters overseas.
Executives at the new clients of Mother New York offered a different perspective.
''We look at ourselves as a company that breaks some rules,'' said Jim Adams, marketing director at Chipotle, which is based in Denver, ''so that wasn't a concern.''
Chipotle was especially interested in Mother's New York office, he added, because of the chance to work with the two partners who are the creative executives there, Linus Karlsson and Paul Malmstrom.
They are a longtime team who most recently worked together at Fallon Worldwide, part of the Publicis Groupe, and are known in the industry by their nickname, the Swedes.
''We make burritos; we try not to take it too seriously,'' Mr. Adams said. ''Mother and the Swedes understand that attitude.''
''We've kept an eye on the Swedes,'' he added, ''so when we heard they were involved in opening this arm of Mother, we said, 'Let's go talk with them.' And we've found our creative soul mates.''
Tim Andree, senior vice president at the basketball league in New York, said the N.B.A. gave the office the creative assignment because ''Mother is obviously one of the hot shops'' in advertising. Also, he added, league executives had worked with another partner at the office, Rob DeFlorio, who before joining Mother had been global advertising director at Nike in Beaverton, Ore.
Mr. DeFlorio said that he, the Swedes and the fourth partner at the office --Andrew Deitchman, formerly a global director at the Red Cell agency in London, owned by the WPP Group -- were optimistic about their prospects, despite the widespread belief that transplants find it difficult to put down roots in New York.
''That's because we don't see our office as a transplant,'' Mr. DeFlorio said, ''because the literal definition is taking organs from one entity and putting them into another.''
''We're all new to the agency,'' he added -- none of the four has worked for Mother before. ''What's being carried forth is the Mother philosophy, the Mother spirit, not transplanted or exported by Mother people from London.''
In hiring the office, neither Chipotle nor the basketball league is dismissing another agency. Chipotle has produced ''pretty much everything in-house since we started in 1993,'' Mr. Adams said. The N.B.A.'s policy is to bring in agencies to handle assignments from time to time as it continues to work with Berlin Cameron/Red Cell in New York, part of WPP.
''At some point, we're going to have to slug it out'' with other agencies, Mr. DeFlorio acknowledged. Asked if he was confident the office would prevail in such reviews as frequently as the flagship London agency does, he replied, ''Absolutely.''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
	THE battle between CBS and NBC over ''The Apprentice'' -- the new rat-race reality series on NBC featuring Donald J. Trump -- is developing into quite a feud.
CBS is taking several unusual steps in an effort to blunt the viewership of ''The Apprentice'' before the NBC reality series gets off the ground on Wednesday nights. Among its maneuvers, CBS counter-scheduled popular hourlong dramas like ''CSI: Crime Scene Investigation'' and ''Cold Case.'' Those moves came after NBC decided to broadcast a special preview edition of ''The Apprentice'' last Thursday.
Stunt scheduling, as this activity is known in TV, is not uncommon as networks try to discourage viewers from sampling shows on other channels by enticing them with specials or programs shown at different times. At stake is millions of dollars in advertising revenue, not to mention ratings supremacy on Thursday, the most lucrative night of prime-time broadcast programming.
But stunts are not typically wielded against a series like ''The Apprentice'' that was introduced in midseason and not intended to last a full season. NBC has ordered 13 weeks of the series, which presents 16 would-be moguls competing for a job with Mr. Trump in New York. Mr. Trump is an executive producer of the show, along with Mark Burnett, who created ''Survivor'' for CBS.
''It sounds like big boys with big toys fighting,'' said Steve Koonin, executive vice president and chief operating officer at two cable networks in Atlanta owned by Time Warner, TBS Superstation and TNT. ''It's kind of a chess match to see who blinks first.''
The combatants are Jeff Zucker, president for entertainment, news and the cable group at NBC, part of the NBC division of General Electric, and Leslie Moonves, chairman and chief executive at CBS, a division of Viacom. Always feisty in challenging each other, they are particularly eager this TV season to gain their networks one or both coveted titles of most-watched by all viewers, a category that CBS now leads, or most-watched by viewers ages 18 to 49, a category that NBC now leads.
''Of course there's gamesmanship and competition between the networks, and that's O.K.,'' Mr. Zucker said in a telephone interview. ''This is all good for network television.''
A CBS spokesman, Chris Ender, said Mr. Moonves could not be reached for comment. Mr. Ender described the situation as ''no big deal, just two successful and competitive networks jockeying for position.''
Two additional elements are intensifying the competition.
One is that after Mr. Burnett created ''Survivor'' -- a big hit -- for CBS, he developed his next two reality series, ''The Restaurant'' and ''The Apprentice,'' for NBC.
The other is that CBS did not renew a contract to broadcast three beauty pageants owned by Mr. Trump -- Miss Universe, Miss USA and Miss Teen. NBC now broadcasts the pageants. (Further fueling the feud, Mr. Trump appeared last night on the NBC entertainment-magazine show ''Access Hollywood'' and criticized Mr. Moonves by name, calling for his dismissal.)
Here is a brief recap of the moves and countermoves. NBC announced last month that ''The Apprentice'' would appear from 8 to 9 p.m. (Eastern and Pacific times) on Wednesdays, starting this week, but decided to offer the first episode as a 90-minute preview last Thursday, from 8:30 to 10. To siphon viewers from the preview, CBS scheduled a special rerun of ''C.S.I.'' from 8 to 9, in addition to a regular, new episode from 9 to 10.
Though viewership of the preview episode of ''The Apprentice'' fell as it progressed, never a good sign, the ratings over all were much stronger than NBC had anticipated. ''The Apprentice'' scored the highest ratings in a year for any first episode of a show among viewers 18 to 49. Not only did 27.8 million people of all ages watch some or all of the episode, it tied ''The West Wing,'' Mr. Zucker said, as the most-watched show among viewers with household incomes of more than $75,000 and more than $100,000.
(The advertisers on the preview episode included marketers that rarely if ever run commercials during reality shows. Among them: the Careerbuilder and Yahoo HotJobs job-search Web sites.)
On Friday, the day NBC was crowing about the preview episode's ratings results, CBS scheduled a special new episode of ''C.S.I.'' to run against the second episode of ''The Apprentice'' on Wednesday. Also on Friday, NBC decided to shift the second episode to Thursday night, from 8:30 to 9:30, and run in its place on Wednesday an encore of the preview episode, edited to 60 minutes.
CBS then countered by moving the new episode of ''C.S.I.'' to Thursday from 9 to 10, against the second half-hour of the second episode of ''The Apprentice,'' to be preceded by another rerun of ''C.S.I.'' from 8 to 9. In its place at 8 p.m. on Wednesday, CBS will show a rerun of ''Cold Case.''
''As a professional in advertising, it's hard enough to follow all these yo-yo games the networks are playing, so I can imagine what it's like for the viewers,'' said Peter Gardiner, chief media officer at Deutsch in New York, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
''The good part is, the first episode of 'The Apprentice' did great numbers,'' Mr. Gardiner said, ''and NBC is using what appears to be a hit to bolster its ratings on what's arguably the most important night of the week.''
Mr. Gardiner is one of three executives at Deutsch who will appear on the second episode, judging a competition between the two teams of contestants to create a campaign for Marquis Jet, which subleases flight time on corporate jets.
''That should add some ratings points in New York,'' Joe Mandese, editor of Mediapost, an online and print publication in New York, said, tongue firmly in cheek.
For all the maneuvering over ''The Apprentice,'' NBC intends for Wednesday to be its regular night, partly to offer a stronger lead-in series for ''The West Wing,'' which appears from 9 to 10 p.m., and partly because Mr. Burnett's contract with CBS prohibits any of his other reality series from appearing against ''Survivor,'' which returns to CBS's Thursday night schedule on Feb. 5.
However, in settling in on Wednesdays, the second half of ''The Apprentice'' will soon be facing at 8:30 a formidable competitor: the weekly episode of ''American Idol,'' returning for a third season on Fox Broadcasting, that reveals the winners and losers of the talent contests as determined by viewer votes.
Mr. Zucker said he was nonplussed. ''Who,'' he asked, ''is a bigger American idol than Donald Trump?''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
Correction:  March 25, 2006, Saturday  An article in The Arts on March 13 about Tony DiSanto, executive vice president for series development and animation at MTV Networks, misstated the role of Mark Burnett, one of the ''reality auteurs'' to whom a media professor compared him. (Similar errors occurred in more than a dozen earlier articles, dating to July 2001.) Mr. Burnett is an executive producer of ''Survivor,'' not the creator. Charlie Parsons, another executive producer of ''Survivor,'' created the format, initially for a Swedish show, on which it is based.
	