Within days of convening, the new Congress will return to some of the biggest battles of the last decade as House Democrats try to rush through legislation requiring the government to negotiate lower drug prices for Medicare beneficiaries and overturning President Bush's restrictions on embryonic stem cell research.
The Medicare proposal highlights the profound differences between Democrats and Republicans over the future of the nation's health care system, the proper role of government and the role of private markets in securing the best value for the huge sums spent on health care.
State officials say they wish Congress would focus on a more immediate problem: money for the Children's Health Insurance Program, which provides coverage for four million low-income children, is running out in more than a dozen states.
Dr. Rhonda M. Medows, commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Health, said, ''Our program will run out of federal money in March, and all 260,000 children in the program will lose their health care coverage if Congress fails to act.''
In debating the future of the children's health program, which has broad bipartisan support, Congress will take up proposals to cover some of the 46 million people who have no health insurance.
Dr. Mark B. McClellan, former administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said, ''Congress should consider expanding the Children's Health Insurance Program to low-income adults.'' Many Democrats agree. But even modest proposals may collide with Democratic efforts to restore fiscal discipline and to reduce the federal budget deficit.
Congress convenes on Thursday. Representative Nancy Pelosi, the California Democrat who is in line to be speaker, has said the House will, in its first 100 hours, vote on bills to authorize drug price negotiations under Medicare and to expand federal financing of stem cell research.
Representative Tom Allen, Democrat of Maine, said he was ''giddy'' at the prospect of being able to legislate on health care after toiling for 10 years in the minority. ''People in Maine find it incomprehensible that the Medicare law has a provision that forbids negotiation of lower prices,'' said Mr. Allen, who introduced a bill to give beneficiaries access to drug discounts negotiated by the government in 1998.
By adding a drug benefit to Medicare in 2003, Congress authorized the biggest expansion of the program since its creation in 1965. The drug benefit, unlike most Medicare benefits, is delivered entirely by private insurers subsidized by the government. The insurers negotiate with drug manufacturers to obtain discounts, often in return for promoting the use of particular drugs. The 2003 law prohibits the government from interfering in those negotiations and stipulates that Medicare cannot establish a list of preferred drugs.
Most Democrats want to repeal the ban on price negotiations. Wendell E. Primus, an aide to Ms. Pelosi, said the Democratic proposal would require the secretary of health and human services to negotiate, but would not specify how.
''It will be very simple language,'' Mr. Primus said. ''We do not think that Congress needs to hammer out all the details. There are a lot of smart people in the administration, including the secretary, who can look at how we're buying drugs -- the Medicaid program, the Department of Defense, vaccines, et cetera -- and figure out the best way of negotiating better prices with drug companies.''
Republicans said they welcomed the opportunity to debate the issue. The House Republican leader, Representative John A. Boehner of Ohio, said the Democrats' proposal would ''take a wrecking ball to a popular program that has cut drug costs for consumers through competition.'' Such competition, he said, ''has kept prices lower than anyone expected.''
Administration officials suggested that Mr. Bush would veto a bill calling for price negotiations. Democrats could then exploit the issue in the 2008 campaign, as they did in the midterm elections.
Under a bill introduced in 2005 by several House Democrats, Medicare would offer a government-run drug plan, in addition to all the plans offered by private insurance companies, and federal officials would negotiate with drug manufacturers on the prices of drugs covered by the government plan.
But aides to Ms. Pelosi said House Democratic leaders now wanted to go further. Under their proposal, the government would negotiate on behalf of all people in Medicare drug plans, more than 22.5 million people.
House Democrats assume that if the government negotiates lower drug prices, the savings will automatically be passed on to beneficiaries in the form of lower premiums. But they could not immediately say how they would guarantee that result. In the absence of detailed instructions from Congress, lower drug prices could mean lower costs and higher profits for the insurers that operate Medicare drug plans.
Michael O. Leavitt, the secretary of health and human services, said he did not want the power to negotiate. ''I don't believe I can do a better job than an efficient market,'' Mr. Leavitt said in an interview.
Leslie V. Norwalk, acting administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said that under the Democrats' proposal her agency would have to ''hire hundreds of people to negotiate prices for 4,500 different drugs.'' And Ms. Norwalk said the agency would be besieged by lobbyists seeking higher Medicare payments for specific drugs. That, she said, is ''how Washington really works.''
Senator Max Baucus, the Montana Democrat who is in line to become chairman of the Finance Committee, helped shape the 2003 law. In March, he voted against a proposal to authorize drug price negotiations. But Mr. Baucus, who is up for re-election in 2008, said he had an open mind and would hold hearings on the idea.
Kate Leone, an aide to the Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, said Senate Democrats had the same legislative priorities as House Democrats, but were not committed to the 100-hour schedule.
Mr. Primus said the new Congress would also ''give the president another chance to veto a stem cell bill,'' like the one he vetoed in July.
In campaign commercials in 2006, Democrats and some Republicans boasted of their support for embryonic stem cell research as a way to find treatments for a wide range of diseases. Advocates of such research say that, despite gains in the elections, they still do not have the votes to override a veto. They are working with Senate allies on a plan to attach the stem cell bill to unrelated legislation that Mr. Bush would feel obliged to sign.
Lawmakers are also likely to wrestle with these issues:
Many Democrats will try to reduce Medicare payments to managed care plans. They contend such plans are overpaid by about 10 percent. Insurers intend to fight back, with support from the Bush administration, Republican lawmakers and beneficiaries who see the plans as a way to obtain extra benefits at an affordable cost.
Congress faces a huge challenge in devising a new formula to pay doctors for treating Medicare patients. Under the current formula, doctors' fees would be cut more than 4 percent a year for the next decade. Lawmakers are determined to avert such cuts, but see no easy way to pay the cost.
Democrats have drafted legislation to speed the approval of safe, low-cost versions of expensive biotechnology drugs, which account for a growing share of spending on pharmaceuticals.
People who pay for health care, including state officials, employers and insurers, support such legislationas a way to slow spending on biotech drugs, which can cost more than $10,000 a year. Biotech companies argue that their products, made from living organisms, are so complex that they cannot be exactly duplicated by generic drug manufacturers. As a result, they say, a ''copy'' would rarely be interchangeable with the original.
The Food and Drug Administration has approved thousands of generic drugs deemed equivalent to traditional brand-name medicines. But the agency is unsure of its legal authority to approve such versions of biotech drugs.
	President Bush threatened on Thursday to veto legislation that would require the government to negotiate with pharmaceutical companies to obtain lower drug prices for Medicare beneficiaries.
But chances for passage of some version of the legislation increased when a pivotal figure, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, said Congress should repeal a provision of the 2003 Medicare law that prohibits such negotiations.
The chairman, Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, said he did not favor price controls, but did believe that Medicare should be able to negotiate prices in ''discrete areas where seniors need our help the most.''
House Democrats would go further, requiring the secretary of health and human services to negotiate the prices that may be charged for most drugs covered by Medicare.
The House is scheduled to vote Friday on that proposal. While the Democratic bill is expected to pass, the White House announced the veto threat on Thursday in an effort to hold down the number of votes and to prevent the measure from gaining any more momentum.
''Government interference impedes competition, limits access to lifesaving drugs, reduces convenience for beneficiaries and ultimately increases costs to taxpayers, beneficiaries and all American citizens alike,'' the White House said in a written statement on the House bill.
Mr. Baucus said he was seeking a middle ground between Republicans, who strongly support the existing ban on federal price negotiations, and House Democratic leaders, who want to require the secretary to negotiate.
''The total prohibition on negotiation should be eliminated,'' Mr. Baucus said after listening to two and a half hours of testimony from experts at a Finance Committee hearing. Mr. Baucus is acutely sensitive to public concern about drug prices because he is up for re-election in 2008.
The debate over Medicare drug prices epitomizes the profound differences between the parties over the proper role of government in the nation's health care system. Democrats would prefer that government play a stronger role in guaranteeing access to care at lower prices. Many Republicans, on the other hand, say the market would work better if government got out of the way.
Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said the Democratic proposals were ''a stalking horse for price controls.'' In seeking a larger federal role, he said, they remind him of the Clinton administration's ill-fated plan for universal insurance coverage.
''We have enough votes to sustain a veto,'' Mr. Grassley said.
Mr. Baucus and other Senate Democrats said the government should negotiate drug prices in a few, carefully selected areas where competition had not driven down prices.
Senator Olympia J. Snowe, Republican of Maine, said Mr. Baucus's position was highly significant. ''It paves the way for the possibility'' of giving the government the authority to negotiate, she said.
On Wednesday, Ms. Snowe and Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, introduced a bill that would repeal the ban on drug price negotiations. The bill would require Medicare to help negotiate contracts for a drug if the federal government had invested a substantial amount of money in its development.
It would also require Medicare to negotiate contracts when a brand-name drug was available from only one manufacturer and no substitute or ''therapeutic equivalent'' was available.
Mr. Baucus said, ''For certain unique drugs, it seems that the prices are way too high.''
But Richard G. Frank, a professor of health economics at Harvard, said that some of these drugs ''really make a difference in people's lives.'' The drugs may be expensive, Dr. Frank said, but imposing cost controls may pose ''particular risks to precisely the research and development that should be most encouraged.''
The Congressional Research Service said that if the government negotiated lower drug prices for Medicare, pharmaceutical companies might respond by increasing prices for other buyers.
''While drug prices paid by Medicare beneficiaries may fall, overall drug prices may increase for other consumers, specifically for the under-65 population,'' the research agency said.
The White House and drug manufacturers say Medicare is such a large buyer of prescription drugs that it could, in many cases, dictate prices.
Ms. Snowe and Mr. Wyden rejected that argument. Their bill says the secretary cannot set prices or establish a uniform list of covered drugs, known as a formulary.
Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, the chief sponsor of the bill requiring federal price negotiations, said Thursday, ''The purchasing power of more than 40 million Medicare beneficiaries will allow the secretary to achieve lower prescription drug prices.''
But the Congressional Budget Office said the bill would have only ''a negligible effect on federal spending.'' Under the bill, it said, the government could not encourage Medicare beneficiaries to use particular drugs and therefore ''would lack the leverage to obtain significant discounts in negotiations with drug manufacturers.''
	With his proposal to uproot a tax break that has been in place for more than 60 years, President Bush has touched off an impassioned debate over the future of the employer-based system that provides health insurance to more than half of all Americans.
''Changing the tax code is a vital and necessary step to making health care affordable for more Americans,'' Mr. Bush said in his State of the Union address this week.
Mr. Bush said his proposal would eliminate a bias in the tax code that strongly favored insurance provided by employers over coverage bought by individuals and families outside the workplace.
Paul Fronstin, director of health research at the Employee Benefit Research Institute, a nonpartisan organization, said: ''The president's proposal would mean the end of employer-based benefits as we know them. It gives employers a way out of providing the benefits because their employees could get the same tax break on their own.''
Tony Fratto, a White House spokesman, denied that the president wanted to move people away from the employer-based system and toward the individual insurance market. ''We are seriously agnostic on that,'' he said.
It might take years for changes to occur. ''Large corporate employers could not immediately terminate their health benefits because there is, at present, no reliable place where employees can get coverage they can afford outside the workplace,'' said Frank B. McArdle, a health policy expert at Hewitt Associates, a benefits consulting firm.
The economic rationale for Mr. Bush's proposal is that too many people have ''gold-plated, deluxe'' health insurance, which encourages them to use excessive amounts of health care, driving up costs for everyone.
Many economists agree. But they doubt that Mr. Bush's proposal would do much to hold down costs or cover more people.
''The president's proposal addresses inequities in the tax code that provide an open-ended subsidy for premiums paid by employers,'' said Robert D. Reischauer, a former director of the Congressional Budget Office. ''If your employer does not provide health insurance and you have to buy it on your own, you get no tax benefit at all. The president's plan would eliminate that distinction.''
But Mr. Reischauer said, ''A glaring problem with the president's plan is that he did not call for any stronger regulation of the individual insurance market.'' In that market as it now exists in most states, insurers can deny coverage or charge higher rates to sick people.
In their desire to achieve universal coverage, some Democrats have also begun to raise questions about the employer-based system. ''We have to ask ourselves if the employer-based system of health care is still the best way for providing insurance to all Americans,'' said Senator Barack Obama, Democrat of Illinois, noting that workers frequently changed jobs.
The Service Employees International Union negotiates with employers to secure health benefits for its members, but the president of the union, Andrew L. Stern, said, ''The current employer-based health care system is not the foundation for 21st-century health care reform.''
Mr. Bush's proposal differs radically from President Bill Clinton's plan for universal coverage, but experts on health benefits said they were similar in one respect: In an effort to help the uninsured -- about one-sixth of the population -- they would upend the system that covers most Americans.
The Clinton plan would have provided comprehensive health benefits to 39 million uninsured Americans, with more than $400 billion in new federal spending over 10 years. The White House says the tax changes proposed by Mr. Bush would provide coverage for 3 million to 5 million people at no cost to the government over 10 years.
Since Mr. Bush took office in 2001, the number of people without insurance has increased by more than 5 million, to 46.6 million, according to the Census Bureau. Administration officials said they hoped to reverse that trend by helping states that offered basic private insurance policies to their residents. To pay for such help, the administration would take federal money from hospitals that serve large numbers of poor people.
Under Mr. Bush's proposal, employee health benefits would, for the first time, be treated as income and would be subject to income and payroll taxes, just like wages. At the same time, Mr. Bush would create a tax deduction for health insurance of $15,000 for families and $7,500 for individuals. The same deduction would be available to everyone with coverage, regardless of the source or value of the policy.
A family with coverage worth $18,000 would have to pay taxes on the amount exceeding the $15,000 standard deduction -- $3,000, in this example.
Katherine Baicker, a member of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, said the proposal would increase taxes for 30 million people with the most generous employer-provided health benefits, unless they ''change their behavior'' and choose less costly coverage. Ms. Baicker said the proposal would cut taxes for more than 100 million people who bought insurance on their own or had employee health benefits worth less than the standard deduction.
Treasury officials said that under the Bush proposal, an uninsured family of four with an annual income of $60,000 would save $4,545 if it bought coverage in the individual market. By contrast, they said, a family that earns $80,000 and has employer-provided coverage worth $20,000 could see a tax increase of about $1,500.
Joel D. Kaplan, deputy chief of staff at the White House, acknowledged that the proposal could accelerate the trend of employers' dropping health benefits for employees. But he said more people ''would be able to buy insurance in the individual market,'' so there would be ''a net increase in the number of insured.''
Politicians and health care providers are skeptical.
Representative John D. Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who is the chairman of the Committee on Energy and Commerce, said, ''The president's proposal would do little to help the uninsured, but would undermine the employer-based system through which 160 million people get coverage.''
Richard J. Umbdenstock, president of the American Hospital Association, agreed. ''The tax proposal would have the effect of driving people to the small-group insurance market -- a market that has proved unstable,'' Mr. Umbdenstock said. ''For many people, even with a tax break, coverage would remain unaffordable.''
Historically, employers have used benefits as a tool to recruit workers and keep them healthy and productive.
R. Bruce Josten, executive vice president of the United States Chamber of Commerce, praised the general direction of the president's proposal but said his members had serious concerns.
First, Mr. Josten said, the $15,000 cap on tax-free insurance takes no account of wide geographic variation in the cost of health care and insurance. The same package of benefits typically costs more in Boston than in Minneapolis, for example.
Moreover, Mr. Josten said, a health plan may be expensive because it covers older workers with major medical problems, not because it is ''gold-plated.'' A single mother, working as a low-paid secretary at a law firm, could be pushed into a higher tax bracket because she participates in an $18,000 health plan covering older men who have had heart attacks and expensive surgery, Mr. Josten said.
Treasury officials acknowledged that some people with costly, comprehensive benefits had modest incomes.
But deluxe health plans are vanishingfast. In recent years, many workers have found themselves paying more for less comprehensive benefits. From 2000 to 2006, premiums for employer-sponsored coverage rose 87 percent, about four times as fast as workers' earnings, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.
	