Ali al-Marri, whom the government calls a sleeper agent for Al Qaeda and who is the only person on the American mainland still held as an enemy combatant, spends his days in a small cell in solitary confinement at the Navy brig in Charleston, S.C. When he is in an ironic mood, his lawyers say, he calls the cell his villa.
Mr. Marri waits there for word from his wife, two sons and three daughters, whom he last saw in 2001, just before his arrest in Peoria, Ill., where he was studying computer science at Bradley University.
Letters arrive, but they are late and have words and sentences blacked out. A note his wife sent to him 10 months ago landed recently. It began with a standard Muslim invocation, but a word was missing. Mr. Marri is pretty sure it was ''Allah.''
But mostly Mr. Marri waits for word from a federal appeals court, which will soon rule on one of the most urgent questions in American law, one his case presents in stark form: May the government indefinitely detain a foreigner living legally in the United States, without charges and without access to the courts?
Mr. Marri, who is 41 and a citizen of Qatar, wants the right to challenge President Bush's assertion that he is a terrorist and ''a grave danger to the national security of the United States.''
The Bush administration says the courts cannot second-guess the president when he decides that someone is an enemy combatant, at least when noncitizens are involved. Detaining combatants is a military rather than a criminal matter, the administration says, adding that its purpose is not to punish the prisoner but to stop him from returning to the battlefield.
The implications of that position are startling, according to a brief filed last month in Mr. Marri's case by some 30 constitutional scholars. ''The government's interpretation would be vastly threatening to the liberty of more than 20 million noncitizens residing in the United States,'' the brief said, ''exposing them to the risk of irremediable indefinite detention on the basis of unfounded rumors, mistaken identity, the desperation of other detainees subject to coercive interrogation, and the deliberate lies of actual terrorists.''
Kathleen M. Blomquist, a spokeswoman for the Justice Department, disputed that contention.
''Of all the terrorists currently in the custody of the United States military, al-Marri is the only one who was captured in the United States,'' Ms. Blomquist said, adding that the notion that millions of people are at risk is ''unfounded and absurd.''
Mr. Bush's determination that Mr. Marri is an enemy combatant, she said, was based on substantial evidence, including ''his association with Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, mastermind of the 9/11 attacks, and files found on his computer concerning chemical weapons of mass destruction.''
Mr. Marri maintains his innocence, his lawyers say. But they have refused to offer point-by-point rebuttals of the government's detailed assertions, calling instead for prosecutors to offer evidence to back them up in court.
''In a civilized society and under American law and tradition,'' said Jonathan Hafetz, a lawyer for Mr. Marri with the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University School of Law, ''the government has the obligation to prove its case.''
One of Mr. Marri's brothers, Mohammed Marri, in a telephone interview from Qatar, rejected the charge that Mr. Marri is a terrorist. ''For sure it's not true,'' he said.
A third brother, Jarallah, is at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, held as an enemy combatant based on accusations that he had visited a Qaeda camp. ''This is not a proper way to treat other people from other countries,'' Mohammed Marri said of his brothers and other detainees. ''If they are guilty, let them prove it in court.''
An Exclusive Club
The Charleston brig can hold 288 military prisoners and 6 enemy combatants, but there have never been more than 3 in the exclusive enemy combatant club. Two of them are now gone.
One of them, Yaser Hamdi, was freed and sent to Saudi Arabia after the United States Supreme Court allowed him to challenge his detention in 2004. Jose Padilla was transferred to the criminal justice system last year just as the Supreme Court was considering whether to review his case. That leaves only Mr. Marri.
Mr. Hamdi and Mr. Padilla are American citizens, but Mr. Marri is not. They were seized abroad or on their way back to the United States, while Mr. Marri was living what seemed to be an ordinary life, in Peoria, a city often caricatured as the nation's most ordinary, with a family and a minivan.
The government contends in a partly declassified declaration from a senior defense intelligence official, Jeffrey N. Rapp, and in a recent book by former Attorney General John Ashcroft, that Mr. Marri was a Qaeda sleeper agent sent to the United States to commit mass murder and disrupt the banking system.
The assertions have not been tested in court, and human rights groups say they are based on unreliable evidence ''There is substantial reason to believe,'' lawyers for two of the groups wrote in a brief in November, ''that the allegations of the Rapp declaration are derived from the torture of two men interrogated at Guantánamo Bay and other detention sites: Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and Mustafa Ahmed al-Hawsawi.''
The government says that Mr. Hawsawi was one of the financiers of the Sept. 11 attacks.
Mr. Rapp's declaration cites the personal views of Mr. Mohammed, who is often referred to as K.S.M. ''K.S.M. considered al-Marri an ideal sleeper agent,'' Mr. Rapp wrote.
Kept in Isolation
Mr. Marri was kept in isolation at the brig and, according to his court filings, subjected to tough interrogation. Interrogators threatened to send him to Egypt or Saudi Arabia, according to a lawsuit filed on his behalf in 2005, ''where, they told him, he would be tortured and sodomized and where his wife would be raped in front on him.''
''By winter '05,'' Andrew J. Savage, who also represents Mr. Marri, said in a recent interview, ''I genuinely thought he was losing his mind. He told me in this sort of indirect way that he might not be able to hold on, that his mind was playing tricks on him.''
Mr. Padilla's lawyers have said that their client's time in the brig was so grueling that he is not fit to stand trial. But while Mr. Padilla was passive, Mr. Marri pushed back. He put wet toilet paper on the video camera, for instance. The brig responded by taking away his mattress, Koran and hygienic products, including his toilet paper.
''There is almost nothing to distract him from his torment,'' his lawyers wrote in the lawsuit, ''and he therefore becomes preoccupied with his pain and the degradation he suffers.''
Perhaps as a consequence of the lawsuit, conditions have improved.
When Mr. Marri's lawyers were first allowed to see him in October 2004, after the decision in Mr. Hamdi's case, Mr. Marri was behind a transparent barrier and bound in leg-irons and handcuffs that were linked to a belly-chain and fastened to the floor. Officials from the Defense Intelligence Agency and the brig were present, and the conversation was videotaped.
On a recent visit, Mr. Savage said, he met his client in a visiting lounge. Mr. Marri, who was not restrained, was wearing stylish bifocals rather than institutional prison glasses. He was also wearing a watch, which makes it easier for him to know when to pray.
Mr. Savage brought hummus and pita bread. ''We sat down, we broke bread, and we had a three-and-a-half hour conversation, unmonitored,'' Mr. Savage said.
Mr. Marri is now allowed to watch television in the evening, but not the news. He reads newspapers and magazines, but they are edited. ''Brig staff remove all materials associated with the war on terror from them,'' Cmdr. Stephanie L. Wright, the brig's commanding officer, said in court filing in July.
Sometimes that makes for a thin newspaper. ''All I get is sports and obits,'' Mr. Marri has complained, Mr. Savage said. He is critical of the former, saying there is not enough soccer coverage.
The Defense Department has allowed journalists and others to tour the Guantánamo facility, where Mr. Marri's brother Jarallah and 400 other men are being held. All of the Guantánamo prisoners are foreigners who were seized abroad. The government has not asserted that the brothers were working together.
The Defense Department refused a recent request to inspect the Charleston brig. A spokesman, Cmdr. J. D. Gordon, cited ''operational security concerns surrounding the detention of an alleged al Qaeda-linked operative in the U.S. mainland,'' a reference to Mr. Marri. Commander Gordon added that ''it has always been our policy to treat all detainees humanely.''
Return to the United States
Mr. Marri spent eight years in the United States as a young man, graduating from Bradley with an undergraduate degree in business administration in 1991. When he returned to the United States 10 years later, he brought his family.
In his declaration, Mr. Rapp noted that Mr. Marri's profile ''differed significantly from that of the Sept. 11, 2001, hijackers.'' Those differences, Mr. Rapp said, made Mr. Marri all the more attractive to Al Qaeda.
The years between Mr. Marri's two stints at Bradley are a mystery. The government says he trained at a Qaeda camp in Afghanistan for about a year and a half between 1996 and 1998, specializing in poisons. The government also says that Mr. Marri visited the United States briefly in 2000, which Mr. Marri has denied.
In the summer of 2001, Mr. Rapp wrote, Mr. Mohammed introduced Mr. Marri to Osama bin Laden. Mr. Marri ''offered to be an Al Qaeda martyr,'' Mr. Rapp wrote.
''Al Qaeda instructed al-Marri that it was imperative that he arrive in the United States prior to Sept. 11, 2001, and that if al-Marri could not do so, that he should cancel all his plans and go to Pakistan,'' Mr. Rapp wrote.
The Marris arrived in Peoria on Sept. 10, 2001.
Mr. Marri soon came to the attention of the F.B.I., which first interviewed him less than a month later. In December, agents searched his laptop, finding ''research consistent with the tradecraft and teachings associated with Al Qaeda,'' Mr. Rapp wrote. Mr. Marri was arrested on Dec. 12, 2001, and held as a material witness at the request of prosecutors in New York. He was indicted two months later on charges of credit card fraud. In January 2003, the government added charges of lying to federal agents and financial institutions, and identity theft. Mr. Marri pleaded not guilty. His family has since returned to the Middle East.
For a year and a half, the government pursued a conventional criminal case. Mr. Ashcroft, in his book ''Never Again,'' which was published in October, wrote that Mr. Marri ''rejected numerous offers to improve his lot'' by cooperating with investigators. ''He insisted,'' Mr. Ashcroft wrote, ''on becoming a 'hard case.' ''
In June 2003, as the case was nearing trial, the government abruptly changed course, taking Mr. Marri out of the criminal system and moving him into indefinite military detention. That means, Mr. Ashcroft later wrote, that Mr. Marri can be held ''at least until the war against Al Qaeda was over.''
In its rush to move Mr. Marri, the government short-circuited its criminal case. On hearing that a federal judge in Peoria would allow Mr. Marri's lawyers to file papers opposing the transfer as long as the criminal case was alive, the government agreed to dismiss the criminal charges with prejudice, meaning they cannot be refiled.
The decision, however, would not prevent the government from charging Mr. Marri with other crimes outlined in Mr. Rapp's declaration.
The declaration has served the purpose for which it was designed. In August, it persuaded Henry F. Floyd, a federal judge in Spartanburg, S.C., to deny a habeas corpus petition challenging Mr. Marri's detention. Saying that Mr. Marri had ''offered nothing more than a general denial'' of the assertions in the declaration, Judge Floyd dismissed the petition.
Neither side was happy with the ruling. Mr. Marri has appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Richmond, saying that the president does not have the power to detain him as an enemy combatant.
A foreigner living legally in the United States, his lawyers say, is not the same as a soldier captured on a battlefield. Even if the president does have the power, they say, he should be required to support his assertions with evidence.
The government argues that Judge Floyd gave Mr. Marri too full a hearing. It cited the recent Military Commissions Act, which says that the courts have no jurisdiction to hear challenges from any alien ''who has been determined by the United States to have been properly detained as an enemy combatant.''
The case will be heard Feb. 1
The government offered Mr. Marri a sort of consolation prize should the appeals court dismiss his case. It said he could try to persuade a combatant status review tribunal, convened by the Defense Department, that he was not an enemy combatant. That would apparently be the first such proceeding on the mainland; all of the others known to have been conducted were at Guantánamo Bay.
A Different View
In a brief filed in November, eight former Justice Department officials, including Janet Reno, the attorney general in the Clinton administration, said that taking Mr. Marri out of the criminal system as his case approached trial ''has given to the appearance of manipulation of the judicial process.'' The brief listed several criminal statutes available to prosecute people accused of terrorism along with many successful prosecutions under them.
''The criminal justice system has proven that it can make the cases,'' Ms. Reno said in an interview. ''For the president to be able to designate someone as an enemy combatant, without process and without regulation, just doesn't make any sense and isn't necessary.''
Ms. Blomquist, the Justice Department spokeswoman, said, ''While we respect the views of former law enforcement officials, the United States cannot afford to retreat to a pre-September 11 mind-set that treats terrorism solely as a domestic law enforcement problem.''
Mr. Marri shared a fantasy with one of his lawyers not long ago. ''I'd love to be taken back to Saudi Arabia and they would beat the'' -- here, he swore -- ''out of me for six months,'' Mr. Marri said, according to Mr. Savage. ''It would be brutal, but it would be finite.''
	In a four-paragraph letter on Wednesday announcing that the Bush administration had reversed its position and would submit its domestic surveillance program to judicial supervision, Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales used one phrase three times. A secret court, he said, had fashioned a way to allow the program to be monitored by the judiciary without compromising the need for ''speed and agility.''
That phrase also captures, some critics say, the administration's moving-target litigation strategy, one that often seeks to change the terms of the debate just as a claim of executive authority is about to be tested in the courts or in Congress.
On Wednesday, the administration announced that an unnamed judge on the secret court, in a nonadversarial proceeding that apparently cannot be appealed, had issued orders that apparently both granted surveillance requests and set out some ground rules for how such requests would be handled.
The details remained sketchy yesterday, but critics of the administration said they suspected that one goal of the new arrangements was to derail lawsuits challenging the program in conventional federal courts.
''It's another clear example,'' said Ann Beeson, associate legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union, ''of the government playing a shell game to avoid accountability and judicial scrutiny.''
In other cases, too, the timing of litigation decisions by the government has been suggestive.
Shortly before the Supreme Court heard a set of three detainee cases in 2004, the administration reversed course and allowed two Americans held incommunicado by the military to meet with their lawyers, mooting that issue.
After the court ruled that one of the men, Yaser Hamdi, could challenge his detention in court, the administration instead freed him and sent him to Saudi Arabia.
And just as the Supreme Court was considering whether to review the case of the second man, Jose Padilla, he was transferred to the criminal justice system last year, mooting his appeal.
Paul W. Butler, a former federal prosecutor who served as special assistant to Donald H. Rumsfeld when he was secretary of defense, said the administration's critics were too quick to view ordinary developments as nefarious ones.
''You do have to ascribe some good faith,'' said Mr. Butler, now a partner with the Washington law firm of Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld. ''The government uses presidential authority when they think it's necessary and the law does not provide the specific authority they need. If there is a road that can be taken, operating according to statutes or putting people into the criminal justice system when that makes sense, they will do that.''
Like other administrations, even when this one alters course, it almost never concedes that its earlier actions were mistaken.
In the case of the eavesdropping program, the administration continues to maintain that it is free to operate without court approval. Its decision to submit to the secret court, administration lawyers said, was voluntary. At a briefing Wednesday, almost as an afterthought, a senior Justice Department official said, ''There's obviously an advantage to having all three branches involved.''
The announcement about the surveillance program came two weeks before a federal appeals court in Cincinnati was to hear the first appellate argument about the lawfulness of the program. Government lawyers now say that case is moot, but their claim is open to question.
The usual rule is that cases seeking relief in the future are indeed moot when the relief they seek is granted. But there is an exception, said David Cole, a lawyer with the Center for Constitutional Rights, which has challenged the program in a separate lawsuit filed in New York.
He cited a series of Supreme Court decisions in which the defendants had voluntarily done what the lawsuits were seeking. Such cases are moot, the court ruled in 1968, for instance, only if it is ''absolutely clear that the allegedly wrongful behavior could not reasonably be expected to recur.''
Because the administration has reserved the right to continue the program, Mr. Cole said, the courts should rule on whether it violated a 1978 law, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act and the Constitution.
A third case, from Oregon, is almost certainly not moot. In addition to asking the court to stop surveillance without warrants in the future, that suit asks for money as damages for past surveillance.
The Oregon case, brought by an Islamic charity and two of its lawyers, differs from the Cincinnati appeal and the New York suit because the plaintiffs in it say they have seen a classified document confirming that their communications were actually intercepted.
''We're certainly center stage now,'' said Jon B. Eisenberg, who represents the charity, Al Haramain Islamic Foundation, and the lawyers.
Mr. Gonzales, speaking to the Senate Judiciary Committee yesterday said that the recent orders involved a creative reading of the 1978 law, often called FISA. After the Sept. 11 attacks, he said, administration lawyers determined that the program could not be reconciled with the law but later decided to ''push the envelope.''
Statements like that frustrate the administration's critics.
''It is very difficult to know if this order in fact satisfies FISA,'' Mr. Cole said.
Because FISA applications are one-sided affairs, with no one arguing the other side, there is no losing party who can appeal from the orders. In a letter on Wednesday, Colleen Kollar-Kotelly, the presiding judge of the 11-member court, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, said she would have no objection to the release of the relevant orders to lawmakers if the Justice Department approved.
But Mr. Gonzales indicated that the department would object to the release of at least the ''operational details'' disclosed in the orders.
THREATS AND RESPONSES: NEWS ANALYSIS
	The Bush administration has employed extraordinary secrecy in defending the National Security Agency's highly classified domestic surveillance program from civil lawsuits. Plaintiffs and judges' clerks cannot see its secret filings. Judges have to make appointments to review them and are not allowed to keep copies.
Judges have even been instructed to use computers provided by the Justice Department to compose their decisions.
But now the procedures have started to meet resistance. At a private meeting with the lawyers in one of the cases this month, the judges who will hear the first appeal next week expressed uneasiness about the procedures, said a lawyer who attended, Ann Beeson of the American Civil Liberties Union.
Lawyers suing the government and some legal scholars say the procedures threaten the separation of powers, the adversary system and the lawyer-client privilege.
Justice Department officials say the circumstances of the cases, involving a highly classified program, require extraordinary measures. The officials say they have used similar procedures in other cases involving classified materials.
In ordinary civil suits, the parties' submissions are sent to their adversaries and are available to the public in open court files. But in several cases challenging the eavesdropping, Justice Department lawyers have been submitting legal papers not by filing them in court but by placing them in a room at the department. They have filed papers, in other words, with themselves.
At the meeting this month, judges on the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit asked how the procedures might affect the integrity of the files and the appellate records.
In response, Joan B. Kennedy, a Justice Department official, submitted, in one of the department's unclassified filings, a detailed seven-page sworn statement last Friday defending the practices.
''The documents reviewed by the court have not been altered and will not be altered,'' Ms. Kennedy wrote, and they ''will be preserved securely as part of the record of this case.''
Some cases challenging the program, which monitored international communications of people in the United States without court approval, have also involved atypical maneuvering. Soon after one suit challenging the program was filed last year in Oregon, Justice Department lawyers threatened to seize an exhibit from the court file.
This month, in the same case, the department sought to inspect and delete files from the computers on which lawyers for the plaintiffs had prepared their legal filings.
The tactics, said a lawyer in the Oregon case, Jon B. Eisenberg, prompted him to conduct unusual research.
''Sometime during all of this,'' Mr. Eisenberg said, ''I went on Amazon and ordered a copy of Kafka's 'The Trial,' because I needed a refresher course in bizarre legal procedures.''
A federal district judge in the case, Garr M. King, invoked another book after a government lawyer refused to disclose whether he had a certain security clearance, saying information about the clearance was itself classified.
''Frankly, your response,'' Judge King said, ''is kind of an Alice in Wonderland response.''
Questions about the secret filings may figure in the first appellate argument in the challenges, before the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, on Wednesday. The three judges who will hear the appeal met with lawyers for the Justice Department and the American Civil Liberties Union on Jan. 8 in a judge's chambers in Memphis.
''The court raised questions about the procedures the government had used to file classified submissions in the case and the propriety and integrity of those procedures,'' said Ms. Beeson, associate legal director of the A.C.L.U., which represents the plaintiffs in the appeal.
''They were also concerned about the independence of the judiciary,'' given that ''the Justice Department retains custody and total control over the court filings.'' Ms. Beeson said.
Nancy S. Marder, a law professor at the Chicago-Kent College of Law and an authority on secrecy in litigation, said the tactics were really extreme and deeply, deeply troubling.
''These are the basics that we take for granted in our court system,'' Professor Marder said. ''You have two parties. You exchange documents. The documents you've seen don't disappear.''
A spokesman for the Justice Department, Dean Boyd, said employees involved in storing the classified documents were independent of the litigators and provided ''neutral assistance'' to courts in handling sensitive information. The documents, Mr. Boyd said, are ''stored securely and without alteration.''
The appellate argument in Cincinnati will almost certainly also concern the effects of the administration announcement last week that it would submit the program to a secret court, ending its eavesdropping without warrants.
In a brief filed on Thursday, the government said the move made the case against the program moot.
Ms. Beeson of the A.C.L.U. said the government was wrong.
At least one case, the one in Oregon, is probably not moot. It goes beyond the other cases in seeking damages from the government, because the plaintiffs say they have seen proof that they were wiretapped without a warrant.
In August 2004, the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control, which was investigating an Oregon charity, al-Haramain Islamic Foundation, inadvertently provided a copy of a classified document to a foundation lawyer, Lynne Bernabei.
That document indicated, according to court filings, that the government monitored communications between officers of the charity and two of its lawyers without a warrant in spring 2004.
''If I gave you this document today and you put it on the front page of The New York Times, it would not threaten national security,'' Mr. Eisenberg, a lawyer for the foundation, said. ''There is only one thing about it that's explosive, and that's the fact that our clients were wiretapped.''
Ms. Bernabei circulated the document to two directors of the charity, at least one of them in Saudi Arabia, and to three other lawyers. She discussed them with two more lawyers. A reporter for The Washington Post, David B. Ottaway, also reviewed the document.
The full significance of the document was apparently not clear to any recipient, more than a year before The New York Times disclosed the existence of the N.S.A. program in December 2005.
The F.B.I. learned of the disclosure almost immediately in August 2004, Judge King said at a court hearing last year, but made no effort to retrieve copies of the document for about six weeks.
When it did, everyone it asked apparently returned all copies of the document. In a statement reported in The Post in March, for instance, Mr. Ottaway said he the F.B.I. had told him that the document had ''highly sensitive national security information.''
''I returned it after consulting with Washington Post editors and lawyers, and concluding that it was not relevant to what I was working on at the time,'' Mr. Ottaway said.
In a sworn statement in June, a lawyer who had the document, Asim Ghafoor, said the bureau took custody of his laptop computer ''in order that the document might be 'scrubbed' from it.''
The computer was returned weeks later.
In February 2006, the charity and the two lawyers who say they were wiretapped sued to stop the program, requesting financial damages. They attached a copy of the classified document, filing it under seal. They have not said how they came to have a copy.
Three weeks later, the lawyers for the foundation received a call from two Justice Department lawyers. The classified document ''had not been properly secured,'' the lawyers said, according to a letter from the plaintiffs' lawyers to the judge.
As Mr. Eisenberg recalled it, the government lawyers said, ''The F.B.I. is on its way to the courthouse to take possession of the document from the judge.''
But Judge King, at a hurriedly convened hearing, would not yield it, and asked, ''What if I say I will not deliver it to the F.B.I.?''
A Justice Department lawyer, Anthony J. Coppolino, gave a measured response, saying: ''Your Honor, we obviously don't want to have any kind of a confrontation with you. But it has to be secured in a proper fashion.''
The document was ultimately deposited in a ''secure compartmented information facility'' at the bureau office in Portland.
In the meantime, copies of the document appear to have been sent abroad, and the government concedes that it has made no efforts to contact people overseas who it suspects have them.
''It's probably gone many, many places,'' Judge King said of the document at the August hearing. ''Who is it secret from?''
A Justice Department lawyer, Andrew H. Tannenbaum, replied, ''It's secret from anyone who has not seen it.''
He added, ''The document must be completely removed from the case, and plaintiffs are not allowed to rely on it to prove their claims.''
Judge King wondered aloud about the implications of that position, saying, ''There is nothing in the law that requires them to purge their memory.''
Mr. Eisenberg, in an interview, said that was precisely the government position. ''They claim they own the portions of our brains that remember anything,'' he said.
In a decision in September, Judge King ruled that the plaintiffs were not entitled to review the document again but could rely on their recollections of it. In October, they filed a motion for summary judgment, a routine step in many civil litigations. In a sealed filing, they described the classified document.
Government lawyers sent Judge King a letter saying the plaintiffs had ''mishandled information contained in the classified document'' by, among other actions, preparing filings on their own computers.
In a telephone conference on Nov. 1, Judge King appeared unpersuaded. ''My problem with your statement,'' he told Mr. Tannenbaum, ''is that you assume you are absolutely correct in everything you are stating, and I am not sure that you are.''
Mr. Boyd of the Justice Department said the government ''continues to explore with counsel ways in which the classified information may be properly protected without any intrusion on the attorney-client privilege.''
	