For a while, it seemed as if Roller Derby was a lost art, like illuminated manuscripts or clog dancing. Actually, it's more like polio: many people assume it was eradicated in the 1970's, but it's still around and, in some areas, quite virulent.
''Rollergirls,'' a documentary-style reality series about Texas Roller Derby that has its premiere tonight on A&E, is proof that the spectacle sport never went away entirely; it just drew less attention. There was a reason interest faded, and ''Rollergirls'' is also proof of that.
There is something creepily fascinating -- and sometimes poignant -- about the women who devote themselves to this campy, feline version of pro wrestling. They do have, after all, tattoos, slutty costumes and stage names like Jailbait and Gun Smoka LaLoca. It's just not enough to fill 13 episodes. One or two episodes could easily do justice to the sport's struggle for recognition and its players' quest for empowerment and self-esteem.
And that could be the one surprise in the series: that women who work as nurses and teachers are somehow most proud of themselves when they put on roller skates, helmets and vinyl corsets and punch the daylights out of one another. As Adam, a gay friend of Punky Bruiser, said to a friend as he watched her practice with her teammates, ''It's so trippy that someone would want to do this as a hobby or whatever.'' Only most of them do not view Roller Derby as a hobby. It is their vocation, and they want to make it a professional sport.
It could be argued that other reality shows devote just as much time and attention to even less worthwhile subjects. The heroines of reality shows like ''The Bachelorette'' and ''The Swan'' can't even roller-skate, and millions of viewers tune in to see them make fools of themselves. But those kinds of shows are the opposite of this A&E series. Reality contests take ordinary, identifiable women and pose them in an absurd, artificial fantasy fishbowl. ''Rollergirls'' is a documentary that takes women who pursue an absurd, artificial fantasy sport and tries to pose them as ordinary, identifiable women.
''Rollergirls'' takes heroic steps to go beyond the silliness and try to understand and ennoble players, but the subject is just not worth so much effort.
Roller Derby was a national television rage in the 1950's, and matches filled Madison Square Garden and other arenas as late as the mid-1970's. The basics of the game -- rival ''jammers'' break out of a pack of 10 skaters and sprint around a 100-foot banked track, trying to shove past as many opponents as possible while teammates try to upend rival blockers -- were first suggested in the 1930's by Damon Runyon. But these days, players are not so much Runyonesque as Bob Guccione-ish.
The first episode focuses on a rookie, a stolid, fresh-faced young woman who takes the name Venis Envy to join a team called the Putas del Fuego (Whores of Fire). She explains in a voice-over that Roller Derby has always been her dream (''It's what I think about every day''), and she wants her mother to approve of her new pursuit. We watch as she improves her skills and bonds with her teammates. And that mainly involves a lot of drinking -- with the occasional stop to toilet-paper another player's house or urinate in a dark alley. These players are all based in Austin, Tex., which is supposed to be Texas's classy town. One can only imagine Rollergirls' Night Out in Fort Worth.
Roller Derby is kitschy, but the players take it and themselves very seriously. The women discuss how much they value their friendships, and they exult in their own physical strength, playfulness and high jinks. But the girl-power thing palls quickly; every clique -- water polo players, scrapbook aficionados -- thinks its members are really, really fun and special. To outsiders, the Rollergirls on the town mostly look like just another boozy office outing to a Chippendales show.
There are some intriguing snatches of drunken dialogue, however. In a rented limousine on the way to some late-night bars, Lux explains another player's absence by saying, very earnestly, ''She had some family issues to deal with, and she also messed up her foot at the Jell-O wrestling.''
A&E wants to show a more serious, human side of a clownish sport and does a good job of letting the women speak for themselves. But at the end of the day, it is still Roller Derby. One team, whose players dress up like Roman Catholic schoolgirls in plaid miniskirts and tight white T-shirts, is called the Holy Rollers. ''That's like a hot, they'll be all turned on, straight guys,'' Adam, the other gay friend, told his companion. ''The girls wear short skirts and punch each other in the face.''
Rollergirls  A&E, tonight at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.
Gary Auerbach and Julie Auerbach, creators and executive producers; Nancy Dubuc, executive producer for A&E; Colleen Conway, supervising producer for A&E; Tina Gazzerro, Matt Hovis and Karen Jacobs, co-executive producers. Produced for A&E Network by Go Go Luckey Productions.
TELEVISION REVIEW
Correction:  February 3, 2006, Friday  A television review on Jan. 2 about ''Rollergirls,'' a documentary-style reality series on A&E, misidentified the player who explained another player's absence by saying, ''She had some family issues to deal with, and she also messed up her foot at the Jell-O wrestling.'' It was Cha Cha, not Lux.
	''Four Kings,'' an NBC sitcom about four single straight men who share an apartment and a disinclination to grow up, sounds awful. It's not. Some of the dialogue is quite funny, and as a posse, the slacker bachelors are appealing.
That's mostly because the series was created by Max Mutchnick and David Kohan, the duo behind ''Will & Grace,'' that wicked, madcap look at urban gay life (which could be described as ''Breakfront Mountain'').
NBC hopes ''Four Kings'' will prove wicked and madcap enough about urban heterosexual life to help the network reclaim Thursday nights in a post-''Friends'' era. (The spinoff, ''Joey,'' did not make the cut.) ''Four Kings'' is better than a lot of similar sitcoms, but it's not different enough to stand out in what NBC hopes will be a renaissance of must-see television. The writing is not as clever and high-flown as that of ''Will & Grace,'' and the premise is far more conventional than those of the two new sitcoms that follow, ''My Name Is Earl'' and ''The Office.''
In its eighth season, ''Will & Grace'' is still funny, but it is on its last legs. ''Four Kings'' is an experiment, a chance to see whether the kind of traditional network sitcom made with four cameras and a laugh track can still attract the younger, sophisticated viewers NBC once owned and operated.
There are no laugh tracks, musical cues or cute punch lines on either ''Earl'' or ''The Office.'' The style and sensibility of both are distinctive and closer to HBO than to network television. And both move away from urban sophistication to less familiar territory. Jason Lee plays Earl, a backwoods derelict who has an epiphany and decides to improve his karma by undoing past wrongs. It's satire, but softhearted. Mr. Lee is charming, and in Earl's beer-and-trailer-park world, friends, relatives, neighbors and other delinquents form the kind of ersatz extended family that made shows like ''Seinfeld'' and ''Frasier'' such hits.
''The Office,'' an Americanized version of Ricky Gervais's BBC series, is more pitiless: a mock documentary that is a deadpan parody of workplace mediocrity and tedium. NBC has not always had much luck with knockoffs, but this one works. Steve Carell, who plays Michael, the astoundingly obnoxious, self-deluded boss, has made the character his own, and he is surrounded by a cast of brilliantly awful co-workers who become endearing, but only after a while. For those many viewers who did not see the original on BBC America, the Carell version may seem astonishingly bold.
''Four Kings'' cannot make the same boast. It's easily summed up as a ''Sex and the City'' for men, or a girl-free ''Friends.'' Sweet-natured Ben (Josh Cooke) inherits his grandmother's vast New York apartment and invites his three oldest and best friends to move in with him -- even though he loses his gorgeous girlfriend in the deal. Ben figures that this is their last chance to be together and backslide.
''Soon life is going to be about marriages, careers and rehab,'' he explains. ''Let's do this while we still can.''
Jason (Todd Grinnell) is a former fat kid turned businessman who works out compulsively and also climbs a corporate ladder. Bobby (Shane McRae) is a sweet, dim pothead who will eat anything for a dollar but charges an extra 50 cents ''if it's not food.'' Seth Green, who played Dr. Evil's churlish son in the Austin Powers movies, is Barry, a smart underachiever who is short, paranoid and bitter, particularly about Ben's charmed life.
The series begins with a flashback to the apartment kitchen when the boys were in elementary school and Ben's grandma fed and nagged them. When she sees Barry holding her silver flask, she demands her perfume bottle back. Barry, already a prematurely angry, needling child, retorts that it's not perfume, it's liquor. ''It's perfume for my heart,'' she explains loftily.
Their adult predicaments are classic sitcom plotlines. Barry has to baby-sit for his ex-girlfriend's rude, spoiled twins. Ben gets an assignment from Maxim magazine to write about whither the one-night stand and takes his buddies to a hot club frequented by actresses and models. They are wonderstruck. ''There are, like, two girls for every girl,'' Bobby says.
''Four Kings'' is not misogynistic like ''Two and a Half Men'' on CBS, nor is it as predictable as the mercifully canceled distaff version on ABC, ''Hot Properties.'' The series has grace notes and some wit, but it is also the kind of sitcom that NBC audiences seem to have outgrown. The network must be hoping that viewers will regress right along with the show's characters.
Four Kings  NBC, tonight at 8:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 7:30, Central time.
Directed by James Burrows (pilot); David Kohan and Max Mutchnick, creators and executive producers; Tim Kaiser, producer; Bruce Alden, associate producer. A KoMut Entertainment and Warner Brothers Television production.
WITH: Seth Green (Barry), Josh Cooke (Ben), Todd Grinnell (Jason) and Shane McRae (Bobby).
TELEVISION REVIEW
	There are a few shows that are sophisticated and also have a childish appeal. Even some of the most jaded television snobs look forward to the season premieres of ''The Sopranos'' or ''Curb Your Enthusiasm,'' as if those HBO shows were Christmas morning. On Fox, a new ''24'' also has the power to make grown men squeal.
And amazingly, the new season, which once again drags the special agent Jack Bauer (Kiefer Sutherland) back into the line of duty, does not disappoint. ''Sleeper Cell,'' a Showtime series about an undercover F.B.I. agent who infiltrates a Muslim terrorist cell in Los Angeles, is a spookier, subtler thriller. But ''24'' still provides an irresistible blend of iPodish computer wizardry and ''Perils of Pauline'' cliffhanger suspense.
Fox asked critics to swear a blood oath not to reveal the plot of the first 10 minutes of the four-hour premiere that will be shown in two parts on Sunday and Monday nights, and even most spoiler Web sites have shown admirable restraint. But obviously, dire things happen, leaving many lives and national security at stake. Bauer, who last season saved the nation from a cataclysmic nuclear attack and then had to fake his own death to avoid extradition to China, is the one man who can save the day, or in this case, Day 5.
This countdown clock begins ticking at 7 a.m., 18 months after the end of Day 4. (Each episode takes place over one hour of a 24-hour day that ends at the conclusion of the season.) Bauer, who is still officially dead, has assumed a new identity as Frank, an oil rig worker who lives in Mojave, Calif., with a girlfriend, Diane (Connie Britton), and her surly teenage son, Derek (Brady Corbet).
There has been considerable turnover at Bauer's old office in the Los Angeles branch of the counterterrorism unit, but fortunately, the best computer savant, Chloe (Mary Lynn Rajskub), is still hard at work in the unit, and she remains as delightfully irritable and awkward as ever. This season, she has a suitor, of sorts, yet even romance does not soften her demeanor. And she is still willing to break rules to decode and reroute all kinds of computer data to help Bauer.
Mr. Sutherland does the best he can to suggest the inner turmoil of Jack Bauer, a character who is too busy fleeing his friends and pursuing his enemies to reveal much personality. Haunted and hard-boiled, Bauer is a classic action-adventure hero: a man of few words but many tricky martial arts moves. So color on ''24'' is mainly provided by secondary characters. Unfortunately, Jack's annoying daughter, Kim (Elisha Cuthbert), is fated to make a return appearance. But at least there are a few, new enjoyable faces.
Charles Logan (Gregory Itzin) is still a Nixon-lite president of the United States -- vain, volatile and prone to panic. (He routinely lashes out at senior aides, who stare back at him with dismayed stoicism.) This time, however, the story includes his wife, Martha (Jean Smart), who appears to be mentally unstable and somewhat paranoid when off her medication -- a latter-day Martha Mitchell. The first lady suspects that a sinister plot is afoot, but her husband and his top aides keep assuring her that she is imagining things, like Ingrid Bergman in ''Gaslight.'' But they sometimes do have a point: no first lady in her right mind would wear plunging décolletage and thigh-high stockings to a summit meeting with the Russian president.
Well, maybe in a West Coast White House. ''24'' was created by Robert Cochran and Joel Surnow, both of whom worked on the hit series ''La Femme Nikita.'' Their latest endeavor has an indelible Los Angeles flair: the counterterrorism unit office looks more like the headquarters of Creative Artists Agency than the Central Intelligence Agency, and for some reason, all the villains, be they Islamic fundamentalists, drug smugglers, American oil brokers or Russian separatists, keep picking Los Angeles as a target for attack. This could be a signal that the world now views America as a superpower in show business alone, and that the epicenter of any first strike should be Hollywood. More likely, the show's creators preferred to keep location shoots close by.
It doesn't really matter; the series is not meant to be plausible, it is supposed to be cathartic -- a way of working out our worst fears of modern-day terrorism, be it bio, cyber or nuclear, in a fantasy that brings us right to the brink of destruction until one superhero prevails. It's the same scenario every season, and each one provides the same, ever-escalating brushes with catastrophe. Keeping any thriller going for 24 episodes is not an easy matter, however, and each season is over-packed with contorted plot twists, false leads and red herrings. Inevitably, there are moments when the series's creative verve starts to flag.
''24'' is a little like childbirth: by the end of each season, the process seems unbelievably long and painful, but once it is over, that is forgotten and most are ready to start all over again.
24  Fox, Sunday and Monday nights at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time.
Created by Joel Surnow and Robert Cochran; Brian Grazer, Mr. Surnow, Mr. Cochran, Howard Gordon and Evan Katz, executive producers; Kiefer Sutherland, co-executive producer. A production of Real Time Productions and Imagine Television in association with 20th Century Fox Television.
WITH: Kiefer Sutherland (Jack Bauer), Connie Britton (Diane), Brady Corbet (Derek), Gregory Itzin (President Logan), James Morrison (Bill Buchanan), Roger Cross (Curtis Manning), Louis Lombardi (Edgar Stiles), Mary Lynn Rajskub (Chloe O'Brian), Jean Smart (Martha Logan), Carlos Bernard (Tony Almeida), Kim Raver (Audrey Raines), Sean Astin (Lynn McGill) and Elisha Cuthbert (Kim).
TV WEEKEND
	