OPEC sought to strengthen its grip on world oil markets on Tuesday with an announcement of cuts in production, aggressively displaying its desire to maintain oil prices at their highest sustained level in two decades. Prices rose in response, up more than 3 percent in New York, to $33.87 a barrel.
The formal reduction in output by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, intended to withdraw one million barrels of crude oil a day from the market starting in April and seen by some here as a surprise, would lower the group's production objective to 23.5 million barrels a day. OPEC members also called for stricter adherence to their own quotas in an effort to reduce overproduction by a further 1.5 million barrels a day.
''We will do what it takes to keep the price stable,'' said Ali al-Naimi, the oil minister of Saudi Arabia, OPEC's pivotal and most productive member. ''Saudi Arabia could not countenance waiting until the next meeting to decide on a cut as that would be too late.''
OPEC's announcement emphasized a more forceful approach in its strategy to pre-empt developments that might cause oil prices to decline, like increased production by Russia, Norway or other producing nations that do not belong to OPEC.
Economists said that OPEC's production cut, while unlikely to push prices up enough to damage the American economy, could dampen the recovery somewhat.
''Generally, lower oil prices are better for the economy than higher prices,'' said Joel Prakker, chairman of Macroeconomic Advisers, a consulting firm in St. Louis. ''That said, oil at $33 a barrel is not the end of the economy. It just means it won't grow as fast as if prices were falling or were $20.''
A White House spokesman reacted to OPEC's move on Tuesday with apprehension. Shortly after the output reduction was announced, the spokesman, Trent Duffy, said, ''It is our hope that producers do not take actions that undermine the American economy and American workers, and American consumers for that matter.''
OPEC cited expectations of waning seasonal demand as the main justification for the production cuts, but some individual representatives cited other reasons. Libya's energy minister, Abdulhafid Mahmoud Zlitni, said ''excessive supply'' from growing production by non-OPEC members contributed to the group's decision. OPEC accounts for about a third of global production, down from 65 percent three decades ago.
It remains to be seen in the weeks and months ahead whether OPEC will actually reduce production as much as it says it intends. Together, the steps outlined on Tuesday would effectively cut OPEC output nearly 10 percent, an ambitious objective that was met with skepticism by energy industry executives and analysts who see little incentive for member nations to reduce production while oil prices remain relatively high.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday, benchmark crude oil for March delivery increased $1.04 a barrel, the biggest one-day gain in more than a week. It has traded above $30 a barrel for more than two months, and has sold at levels from $25 to $40 for almost two years. Five years ago, oil traded for $11.30 a barrel.
Prices have remained relatively high even though OPEC's 11 members have regularly surpassed production quotas. This has increased revenue significantly -- every OPEC nation relies on oil for a significant part of its budget, and most OPEC members remain under considerable fiscal pressure.
Venezuela, which has been incapable of meeting its production quota since a government purge last year of managers at the national oil company, devalued its currency by 17 percent this week to generate more revenue from international oil sales. About half of Venezuela's export revenue comes from oil, making production cuts particularly painful.
Officials here in Algeria, the host of Tuesday's gathering, said they were doing all they could to increase domestic oil production to finance antiterrorism efforts and the rebuilding of essential infrastructure wrecked by a decade of civil conflict that has resulted in more than 100,000 deaths.
The Algerian finance minister, Abdelatif Benachenhou, confirmed in an interview on Tuesday that his government intended to lobby with other OPEC members to increase Algeria'as production quota. Mr. Benachenhou also stressed a need for higher oil prices because of the decline of the dollar against the euro.
''Almost 95 percent of our exports are in dollars while more than 90 percent of our imports are in euros,'' he said. ''Algeria is like a household that earns its money in dollars and spends it in euros.''
Such sentiment appears to put much of the responsibility for any short-term cuts in OPEC production on Saudi Arabia, which has greater capacity to make rapid shifts in its output. Mr. Naimi, the Saudi minister, affirmed his goal of getting the commodity price of oil down to $25 a barrel, but he generated few believers that anyone in OPEC wanted lower prices.
''It remains to be seen whether the Saudis can do it,'' said Katherine Specter, an energy strategist at Deutsche Bank. ''For now, it's still mostly an empty statement.''
Even so, the psychological effect of OPEC's announcement and the prospect of higher oil prices evoked surprise and concern among several energy company representatives who came to Algiers to follow Tuesday's meeting. ''We will have to react to this right away,'' said Shigeru Kikuchi, an energy analyst at Idemitsu, a large Japanese refinery company. ''It was not something we had expected.''
OPEC would need to cut its output by only about a million barrels a day to keep prices at the higher end of its proposed trading range of $22 to $28 a barrel, said Jim Burkhard, director of oil market analysis at Cambridge Energy Research Associates.
OPEC's price, based on the average price of several types of crude produced by its members, has been above $28 since the beginning of December -- after the previous production cut of 900,000 barrels in September. The OPEC price is generally $2 to $3 a barrel below that of higher-quality West Texas intermediate crude oil traded in New York.
OPEC's price range is of keen interest to the oil markets as members continue to voice concern that the declining value of the dollar, the currency in which oil is priced, makes their trade in other currencies more expensive. In fact, OPEC seems prepared to allow oil prices to remain above $28 for some time.
''A sense of higher prices, whether stated policy or not, is what is happening in practice,'' Mr. Burkhard said.
	An explosion that flattened a large part of the Algerian port of Skikda last month, killing 30 people and injuring 70 more, has shaken plans to build dozens of liquefied natural gas terminals in the United States to address a forecast shortage of natural gas.
Environmentalists in California, Massachusetts and Alabama have challenged the safety of the proposed L.N.G. terminals, where supercooled natural gas is to be taken from oceangoing tankers, warmed and then pumped into the pipeline network. The Algerian disaster is bolstering arguments against L.N.G. terminals that were already under scrutiny by regulators; about 30 terminals have been proposed for the United States.
The Jan. 19 blast at Skikda -- a port responsible for about a quarter of the L.N.G. exports from Algeria, the world's second-largest L.N.G. exporter after Indonesia -- was the deadliest incident in more than 30 years for the industry.
Sonatrach, Algeria's national oil and gas company, has attributed the explosion to an accident at a steam boiler, and the administration of President Abdelaziz Bouteflika has promised an official inquiry. In the meantime, costs related to the explosion have continued to climb.
Abdellatif Benachenhou, Algeria's finance minister, said in an interview on Tuesday that the nation could lose as much as $300 million in export revenue this year if Skikda remained shut for an extended period. That would be in addition to the $800 million to $1 billion needed to rebuild the port, which was constructed in the early 1970's by Technip, a French construction company, and renovated in the late 1990's by the Halliburton Company, the large Texas energy services concern.
''Of course it will have an impact,'' Mr. Benachenhou said, referring to the Skikda accident. ''We're still trying to figure it out.''
Until last month's explosion, Algeria, which was a pioneer in the L.N.G. industry when its first exporting plants were built 40 years ago, had not suffered a fatal accident at the plants, even during a decade-long civil conflict between the military-backed government and opposition groups that has claimed the lives of about 120,000 people.
The blast came just weeks before the gathering here this week of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, the first time the group has met in Algeria since 1980.
While the Skikda explosion has jolted Algeria's energy industry, it has also raised doubts over the safety of dozens of proposed L.N.G. projects in the United States, where a shortage of natural gas and a projected surge in demand has spurred the ambitions of energy companies. Environmental advocates and other opponents of the terminals -- which would be built in San Francisco, San Diego and Mobile, Ala., among other places -- have seized upon the Skikda blast as an argument for greater scrutiny of those projects.
Even though the Skikda plant is not identical to the terminals being proposed in the United States and the explosion there has not been tied directly to L.N.G., they say the destructive power of that accident should give planners pause when reviewing requests to build in the United States.
''The lesson to take away from Algeria is that it was an event of greater magnitude than anyone expected,'' said Bill Powers, chairman of the Border Power Plant Working Group, an organization in San Diego that has protested plans to build L.N.G. plants nearby in northern Mexico. ''That's why we should not put L.N.G. facilities anywhere near centers of population.''
Opposition was already particularly strong in California. Royal Dutch/Shell and Bechtel shelved plans to build a large regasification plant in Vallejo, Calif., near San Francisco, after residents lobbied against the project. Community opposition to a proposed terminal in Long Beach, Calif., has also been fierce.
Opposition to L.N.G. projects has also strengthened in other states. In Alabama, for instance, Exxon Mobil signaled in late January, after the Skikda explosion, that it would shift its focus to gaining regulatory approval for L.N.G. terminals at two locations in Texas instead of in Mobile Bay in Alabama.
Bob Davis, a spokesman for Exxon Mobil, said the company's decision was not related directly to the Skikda explosion but to persistent opposition to the project from community and government officials in Alabama. Mr. Davis acknowledged, however, that Skikda was increasingly being used as a rallying cry by opponents to L.N.G. installations.
''You've got to be careful about making one-to-one comparisons with the facilities we're considering for the U.S.,'' he said.
Energy industry executives and regulatory officials have pointed out that the explosion in Skikda has been preliminarily attributed to a boiler that is not expected to be part of L.N.G. terminals in the United States, which are to be used for warming liquefied gas back into a vapor, then storing it. The Skikda plant did the opposite, chilling natural gas until it condensed into a liquid, which is easier to transport by ship.
''It's not bad to scrutinize the incident so we can come away with a proper assessment of the risks involved,'' said Michelle Michot Foss, director of the Institute for Energy, Law and Enterprise at the University of Houston. ''Accidents involving L.N.G. have still been relatively rare events.''
There have been only a handful of deadly L.N.G.-related accidents since the first plants to liquefy natural gas were built in the early 20th century, according to Ms. Foss's institute. The worst occurred in Cleveland in 1944, when a gas leak and subsequent blast killed 128 people.
The industry's relatively safe record in the three decades before the Skikda explosion was not enough to convince some environmental advocates that L.N.G. terminals were relatively safe. Stephanie Gomes, an anti-L.N.G. activist in Vallejo, Calif., said the Algeria incident showed the need to put gas-receiving terminals offshore, away from population centers.
''The properties of L.N.G. are dangerous and unknown,'' Ms. Gomes said. ''You just don't put this kind of thing near people.''
Besides fanning debate over L.N.G. terminals in the United States, the Skikda accident has hampered Algeria's ability to deliver natural gas that it has already sold to energy companies in Spain, France and Italy. Sonatrach has pledged to honor its contracts to those companies by shipping gas through pipelines or by purchasing L.N.G. on the international market.
Sonatrach is eager not to lose business to competing L.N.G. projects in Egypt and Nigeria, said Isaac Xenitides, an energy analyst for Fitch Ratings in London. Egypt, which is also close to traditionally large markets for Algerian gas, like Spain, has two L.N.G. exporting plants under construction.
''Someone who might have a contract might be thinking, 'Let's diversify,''' Mr. Xenitides said. ''It's not life-threatening for Sonatrach but this incident will have repercussions for Algeria.''
If Algeria is able to quickly rebuild and expand its gas exporting capability, it could limit the financial impact of the Skikda blast, although oil and gas exports account for more than 95 percent of export earnings and about 60 percent of budget revenue.
L.N.G. is estimated to generate about 15 percent of the nation's hydrocarbon export revenue, and that amount is believed to be rising. Skikda accounted for about a quarter of Algeria's L.N.G. exports, according to Poten & Partners, an energy brokerage and consulting firm in New York.
	Try not to make too much of the women driving sport utility vehicles, the baseball diamonds, the thousands of Americans and Britons or the cul-de-sacs with names like Prairie View at the well-guarded headquarters of Saudi Aramco, the world's largest oil company.
''We are not a state within a state,'' Abdallah S. Jumah, Aramco's chief executive, said in an interview as he discussed the company's influence through its control of more than 10 percent of the world's oil production.
While Aramco's importance to the Saudi economy and the global energy industry is hard to underestimate, the company, like other Western-influenced areas of society, has been caught in the cross hairs of Islamic conservative objections to its American-style management approach.
For instance, while women nearly everywhere in Saudi Arabia are required by religious law to dress conservatively in black shawls and prohibited from driving, Aramco's female employees are allowed to wear Western clothing and drive on company property. Old-fashioned American business practices also persist at Aramco, down to the gold watch after 30 years of service.
And in a striking difference from many oil companies that were seized by governments in the developing world in the last century, Aramco never required its American employees to leave. Though its top executives are now Saudis, the official language remains English, making it easier for the 2,000 Americans who work for the company in Saudi Arabia, most of them living in this dusty city across the border from Bahrain.
''We've had a fortunate lifestyle here,'' said Thomas Owen, 51, an American who was born in Dhahran while his father worked for the company and returned to Saudi Arabia after attending college in the United States to work in the purchasing department. ''There's been little incentive to leave.''
The company still provides plentiful perks to attract American employees, who call themselves Aramcons. The benefits for Americans and other expatriates from rich countries include subsidized ranch-style suburban houses at Aramco's compound here, free health and dental care at the company's own hospitals, nearly 40 vacation days a year and free private education for children until high school, when the company will pay 80 percent of boarding-school costs in the United States.
Still, the attacks last year on Western residential compounds in the capital, Riyadh, and heightened awareness of anti-American sentiment throughout Saudi Arabia have reminded Aramco's employees of their tenuous position in Saudi society. Dhahran was the site of a bombing in 1996 that killed 19 American servicemen were killed and injured 64. Reacting to criticism from the religious conservatives and to economic pressures in a nation with growing unemployment, senior executives are purusing efforts to make Aramco more of a Saudi company.
American and European employees, for instance, are no longer assured lifetime employment when they are hired, as Aramco seeks to fulfill obligations to ''Saudi-ize'' its work force of 54,000 by hiring and training more Saudis. Critical areas of Aramco's operations are already entirely run by Saudis, like the futuristic control room where technicians manage the nation's oil output.
The emphasis on employing more Saudis is a priority. Out of a total population of about 24 million, Saudi Arabia has roughly 6 million foreign workers, most from Pakistan, India and other parts of Asia, who perform service jobs. Among Saudi men, the unemployment rate is 10 percent, according to government statistics, but is probably as high as 13 percent, said Nahed Taher, chief economist at National Commercial Bank in Jeddah. (Women, who are prevented from working in most areas of the economy, are not counted in unemployment figures.)
Aramco's field operations are another area where officials are seeking to hire more Saudis. At Shaybah, an isolated oil production site tucked between sand dunes in the windswept Empty Quarter, nearly all of the 300 Aramco staff employees are Saudis, and there is pressure from above to hire more Saudis for the 350 nonstaff contracted positions.
''It's a little like the opposite of outsourcing in other countries where the idea is to have fewer jobs,'' said Mohammed Hatlani, operations manager at Shaybah, which produces 500,000 barrels of oil a day. ''Sometimes these things are beneficial to the kingdom.''
A job at Aramco, to be sure, is a prize for many Saudis, too. Their benefits include relatively high salaries, no-interest home loans and, for some Saudi women, the opportunity to work in a Western-style environment. There is also no income tax in Saudi Arabia, making a stable job at Aramco, the nation's largest single employer, more lucrative.
About 85 percent of the work force is Saudi, up from less than 60 percent three decades ago, when Aramco was controlled by American oil concerns and called the Arabian American Oil Company. It was formed in the 1940's by oilmen from California and Texas.
Saudi Arabia nationalized the company in 1976 but kept its American management largely intact until the mid-1980's, when Ali al-Naimi became the first Saudi chief executive. Mr. Naimi, who later rose to his current position as oil minister, still serves as chairman of Aramco's board, which includes three American directors.
Traditionally loath to allow public scrutiny of its operations, Aramco recently opened up a bit after questions were raised about its reserves and its ability to remain the world's leading oil producer.
Commenting on the company's aversion to debt and its ability to finance its own extensive exploration, Nansen Saleri, the manager of reservoir management, said Aramco operated much as it did when it was owned by four American oil companies.
''We have not changed one iota in this regard,'' said Mr. Saleri, a Turkish-born American citizen based at Aramco's Dhahran headquarters.
Aramco, which produces about eight million barrels a day, generated an estimated $85 billion in oil revenue last year after prices climbed to their highest level in two decades, according to Brad Bourland, chief economist at the Samba Financial Group in Riyadh. The company's financial clout extends to other areas, like its fleet of jet aircraft used to travel inside and outside Saudi Arabia. All its pilots are trained in the United States or Britain.
''It feels almost normal here until you get outside the company and its compounds,'' said Richard Pattee, a native of Tacoma, Wash., who moved to Dhahran in October to pilot the company's new Boeing 737.
Few Aramcons speak fluent Arabic, even among second- or third-generation Americans who grew up in Aramco communities. Still, their privileged and relatively isolated life has at times been punctured by the fear of terrorist attacks when they venture outside the Aramco cocoon.
''I still think we have a safer life than people back in the States, but I'm a lot more aware now than I was before,'' said Cathy Rylands, who was born in Ras Tanura, another Aramco location, and returned to Saudi Arabia after marrying an Aramco employee.
	