President Hugo Chávez's decision not to renew the broadcast license of RCTV, one of this country's oldest television stations and a frequent critic of his government, has fueled a fierce debate over whether he is stifling dissent in Venezuela as he strengthens his control of the broadcasting industry.
Senior officials in Mr. Chávez's government moved quickly to react to growing international and domestic criticism of the decision. Reporters Without Borders, the Paris-based press freedom group, said the move, which Mr. Chávez announced in a speech before military officers last week, was a ''serious attack on editorial pluralism.'' The group asked Mr. Chávez's government ''to reconsider its stance and guarantee an independent system of concessions and renewals of licenses.''
Vice President José Vicente Rangel said the decision was not political retaliation but a ''right of the state for reasons that are justified.'' Others officials, however, made it clear that the decision was a reaction to RCTV's editorial policies, particularly in relation to a coup in April 2002 that briefly removed Mr. Chávez as president.
''RCTV's determining role during the events of the 2002 coup must be remembered,'' Willian Lara, the communications minister, said at a news conference on Friday. ''That irresponsible attitude hasn't changed at RCTV.''
The actions of RCTV and other private broadcasters during the chaotic days of the coup are at the heart of their tension with Mr. Chávez's government. Several of the broadcasters appeared to support the coup, substituting coverage of the coup's collapse and Mr. Chávez's return to power with reruns of American movies and Walt Disney cartoons.
Since then, Mr. Chávez has accused the broadcasters of waging a ''psychological war'' against his administration, describing the country's main channels, Globovisión, Televen, Venevisión and RCTV, as ''horsemen of the apocalypse.'' His re-election this month to a six-year term has not tempered his disdain for the traditional news media elite and for RCTV in particular.
''This decision can only be seen as a control strategy and an abuse of power,'' said Ewald Scharfenberg, executive director of the Institute for Press and Society, a group here that examines press freedom issues.
Through elections and personnel changes over the past eight years, Mr. Chávez and his supporters have consolidated power across Venezuela's political institutions, controlling Congress, the Supreme Court and every state government but two. The privately controlled media are one of the areas of society, along with private enterprise, religious institutions and professional sports, outside of Mr. Chávez's control.
Teodoro Petkoff, editor of the opposition-aligned newspaper Tal Cual, described Venezuela's political system as an ''autocracy'' advancing toward ''light totalitarianism,'' in comments this month that inflamed Mr. Chávez's government.
With their vociferous criticism of Mr. Chávez and his policies, private newspapers, television stations and radio broadcasters, along with a small community of Internet bloggers, offer daily evidence that freedom of expression still exists here.
Still, pro-Chávez legislation has enhanced the government's ability to clamp down on critics through legal action or threats of prosecution, creating a ''climate of self-censorship,'' according to Human Rights Watch. A 2004 law subjects television and radio stations to heavy fines or suspension of their licenses for broadcasts deemed to ''condone or incite'' public disturbances.
Similarly, legislators amended the criminal code last year to increase penalties for criminal defamation and libel. Napoleón Bravo, a well-known television journalist, was charged under those new provisions this year for denigrating the Supreme Court by claiming that it was inefficient and suggesting that it be replaced with a brothel.
Since the coup in 2002, two private stations, RCTV and Globovisión, have remained critical of Mr. Chávez while two others, Venevisión and Televen, have become decidedly less so. RCTV's contentious relationship with Mr. Chávez worsened during the coup, when Andrés Izarra, the news operations manager for RCTV, resigned after he said his superiors suppressed coverage of developments about the coup.
Mr. Izarra went on to become Mr. Chávez's communications minister and is now head of Telesur, a pan-Latin American news station that is one of numerous media ventures supported by Venezuela's government in recent years. Federal and regional governments now control five television stations, including one used to broadcast all of Mr. Chávez's domestic speeches and an influential talk show that pillories his critics.
The government also controls eight radio broadcasters and a news agency, and is building a communications satellite with assistance from China that is scheduled to be launched into orbit by 2008. Mr. Lara, the communications minister, said one option for RCTV once its license expires in 2007 would be for Venezuela de Televisión, the government's main broadcaster, to take control of its operations.
Some of Mr. Chávez's dislike for RCTV appears to stem in part from how Marcel Granier, the broadcaster's chief executive, has publicly referred to him as a ''lieutenant colonel.'' The term refers to the rank Mr. Chávez achieved in Venezuela's army, but is also an attempt to mock him as militaristic.
In his speech announcing his decision to not renew RCTV's license, Mr. Chávez, dressed in a military uniform and red beret, appeared to jab at the reference. ''When they try to say that someone is a gorilla, an ignoramus,'' Mr. Chávez said, ''they say he is a lieutenant colonel.''
The tension created by the RCTV decision left some wondering how Mr. Chávez will treat other critics as he starts a new term. ''It leaves a very bad taste that we end the year with this anxiety,'' Archbishop Roberto Luckert of Coro said in comments on private radio. ''This is a trampling of freedom of expression.''
	President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran arrived here on Saturday for talks with President Hugo Chávez, on the first leg of a Latin American visit to enhance Tehran's stature with governments where distrust of the Bush administration already runs deep.
It is Mr. Ahmadinejad's second visit to Venezuela in the past five months, and the two leaders were scheduled to talk about strengthening their economic ties. From here, the Iranian president is to visit Ecuador and Nicaragua, where leftist presidents aligned with Mr. Chavez are taking office this month.
Venezuela's government promoted the visit as an example of Middle Eastern solidarity with Mr. Chávez's opposition to American foreign policy. Venezuela has been a vociferous defender of Iran as the United States steps up efforts to circumscribe Mr. Ahmadinejad's government, most recently through military raids this week on people suspected of being Iranian operatives in Iraq.
State television here showed images of Mr. Chávez embracing Mr. Ahmadinejad and of Iranian cars rolling off an assembly line at a recently inaugurated factory in the city of Maracay. Fifty cadets from Venezuela's naval academy were on hand to receive the Iranian president at the international airport in Maiquetía.
''Welcome, fighter for just causes,'' Mr. Chávez said in a speech here before the National Assembly, describing Mr. Ahmadinejad as a ''revolutionary'' and a ''brother.''
The two countries said Saturday night that they would use a $2 billion investment fund to finance projects in Venezuela and Iran, as well as in other countries. In addition, they said they were considering ventures to train teachers and produce manioc starch in Venezuela. Mr. Chávez also said Venezuela and Iran would press for exporting cuts within OPEC in an effort to push oil prices up from a 19-month low.
Nowhere has Iran's search for allies in Latin America been more fruitful than in Venezuela. The two countries have signed an array of agreements in recent months, pledging to work together here in exploring for oil, building low-income housing and assembling tractors and bicycles, among other ventures.
The tightening alliance with Iran comes as Mr. Chávez pushes for broad changes in Venezuela's political and economic structures. Just this week, Mr. Chávez's government said it would nationalize the entire electricity industry and the country's largest phone company.
Mr. Chávez also announced a plan which, according to some interpretations, would reconfigure municipal governments by replacing them with entities called communal councils. The president's supporters in Congress say the project is inspired by the Paris Commune, the socialist government that briefly ruled Paris in 1871. Critics of the plan, which also includes the construction of entirely new cities in Venezuela's interior, say it would effectively eliminate some of the few elected politicians who remain opposed to the government.
Mr. Ahmadinejad's visit has alarmed Jewish organizations here and elsewhere because of his aggressive talk in relation to Israel. Heinz Sonntag, a prominent Venezuelan sociologist and political commentator, said the visit by Mr. Ahmadinejad was an ''affront and an eventual threat to our fellow countrymen who are Jewish.''
''The invitation of this personality is the finishing touch on Chávez's announcements this week,'' said Mr. Sonntag.
Venezuela has a long history of close relations with Middle Eastern countries, dating to the founding of OPEC in Baghdad in 1960 by Venezuela, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, in an effort to keep oil prices high. Mr. Chávez has strengthened those ties through overtures to Iran, and more recently Syria, where Venezuela and Iran have plans to build an oil refinery capable of processing 150,000 barrels a day.
''There is a desire by Chávez to accelerate what he views as a strategic alliance with Iran,'' said Alberto Garrido, author of ''Chávez's Wars,'' a book recently published here that explores Venezuela's ties to the Middle East. ''The Venezuelan left has for decades considered alliances with Muslim countries as one of the ways to create a new civilization through the toppling of American values.''
For the time being, Venezuela's relations with Iran have revolved around Mr. Chávez's defense of Iran's uranium enrichment plans, while the two countries deepen their cooperation in oil-related areas. For instance, Venezuela said last month that it would buy four oil tankers from Iran, part of Venezuela's plan to increase its 21-ship tanker fleet through the acquisition of 42 additional vessels.
Iran and Venezuela, the world's fourth- and fifth-largest oil exporters, are also exploring for oil together in Venezuela's Orinoco region. And they have plans for a joint oil trading company, part of an ambition by Caracas and Tehran to price oil in euros instead of dollars in order to weaken the influence of the United States in the international oil market.
Iran seems to have also found a welcome in Ecuador, an oil-exporting country where Mr. Ahmadinejad will attend the inauguration of Rafael Correa, a leftist economist elected president last year. And in Nicaragua, Mr. Ahmadinejad will meet with Daniel Ortega, the former guerrilla leader who assumed the presidency this month.
	The government of President Álvaro Uribe, the largest recipient of American aid outside the Middle East, has found itself ensnared in a widening scandal as revelations surface of a secret alliance between some of the president's most prominent political supporters and paramilitary death squads.
Testimony this week from Salvatore Mancuso, a former paramilitary commander who admitted to orchestrating the killing of more than 300 people, as well as a document made public on Friday implicating more than a dozen politicians in the pact with paramilitaries, have injected fresh detail into a slow-burning scandal that has caused Colombia's elite political class to shudder in recent weeks.
Senior members of Mr. Uribe's government and Mr. Uribe himself have said that anyone shown to have had illegal ties to the paramilitaries, which terrorized Colombian cities and the countryside in the nation's internal war, which has gone on for decades, and made fortunes in cocaine trafficking, should be prosecuted in courts of law.
The scandal has already touched Mr. Uribe's cabinet, with Senator Álvaro Araújo, the brother of Foreign Minister Maria Consuelo Araújo, under investigation for collaborating with militias.
''If there's someone involved at the highest level, they will be fired,'' Francisco Santos, Colombia's vice president, said in an interview. ''Scrutiny is fine for us,'' Mr. Santos said. ''This country needs to know the whole truth.''
Some of the details coming to light about the breadth of paramilitary activities are the result of a process set in motion by Mr. Uribe's own government, which has allowed paramilitary leaders to confess their crimes and pay reparations in exchange for reduced sentences of no more than eight years in prison.
Though some militia leaders have balked at the deal, much of Colombia has been gripped by the first such confession, that of Mr. Mancuso, a cattleman who helped found the paramilitary movement in the 1980s in an effort to combat leftist guerrillas.
Mr. Mancuso, 48, who studied English at the University of Pittsburgh, wept during the first days of his testimony at a special hearing in Medellín last month. This week, however, he simply read from a statement describing how he oversaw the assassinations of hundreds of people, with some operations made possible with information from military intelligence.
Mr. Mancuso also put Mr. Uribe in the spotlight by saying that militias pressured people to vote for the president in 2002, when Mr. Uribe was first elected. Mr. Uribe responded quickly by going on a national radio network to say he had never sent any emissaries to strike deals with the paramilitaries.
On the heels of Mr. Mancuso's testimony, a document rumored to exist in recent weeks was published in the daily newspaper El Tiempo on Friday. It describes a secret pact in 2001 between Mr. Mancuso, other paramilitary leaders and 11 congressmen, two governors and five mayors, in which those present agreed to work together to forge ''a new social contract,'' largely in order to protect private property rights.
Senator Miguel de la Espriella, one of the signatories to the pact, helped bring the scandal to light last year by disclosing the ties between politicians and paramilitaries. Like other officials implicated in the pact, he said he was forced to sign, raising doubts as what type of legal punishment, if any, they might receive.
''At first we declined to sign, but when they put a man with a rifle next to the document we understood we had no choice,'' Mr. de la Espriella, a member of the Democratic Colombia party, said in an e-mail interview.
Asked why he was the only politician to come forward with details of the secret agreement, Mr. de la Espriella, alluding to widespread suspicions that legislators and government officials had for years worked in tandem with the paramilitaries, responded, ''I told myself that a half-truth doesn't serve anybody, and we should all contribute to the enlightenment of the truth during so many years of war.''
Those who signed the document included not only supporters of Mr. Uribe but also high-ranking officials in the political opposition, pointing to how a growing portion of the political establishment could be tarnished by the scandal.
Some 30,000 paramilitary members have been demobilized during Mr. Uribe's government in recent years. Colombia's military still receives more than $700 million a year in aid from the United States to combat drug trafficking and armed insurgencies.
Two guerrilla groups, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia and the National Liberation Army, still operate in the country. A truck carrying more than 600 pounds of explosives this week destroyed a dairy plant in southern Colombia owned by Nestlé, the Swiss food company, an act that the police attributed to the rebels.
Although the scandal has emerged as the most pressing political challenge to Mr. Uribe's presidency, his approval ratings remain high, at above 60 percent, after five years of rule and a re-election victory last year. Many Colombians credit Mr. Uribe for declining levels of murders and kidnappings and robust economic growth.
However, political analysts here say a steady stream of disclosures related to the paramilitary scandal could diminish Mr. Uribe's credibility, particularly if implicated officials are perceived to have close ties to the president. The scandal has already entangled a former ambassador to Chile and a former head of the intelligence service.
Equally pressing for Mr. Uribe's government could be the scandal's influence on discussions in the United States Congress of aid to Colombia and a trade agreement awaiting Congressional approval that has been signed by Mr. Uribe and President Bush. Political analysts say the Democratic-led Congress is expected to add greater scrutiny of human rights issues in Colombia.
	