Representative John D. Dingell, a Michigan Democrat who with more than 50 years' tenure is the senior member of the House, is not so sure about the idea of creating an independent group to enforce ethics rules.
But Gabrielle Giffords, a brand-new House Democrat from Arizona, considers it a no-brainer. Of the longstanding approach in which lawmakers are seated on the ethics committee to police their peers, Representative-elect Giffords said, ''It is like having the fox guard the henhouse.''
Those divergent outlooks over how best to fulfill the Democratic promise to clean up the House are just one illustration of a friction that could develop in the new Congress as the party takes control after 12 years in exile. While most attention will be focused on the divide between Republicans and Democrats, members of the new majority have their own differing perspectives, corresponding largely to length of service, that could ultimately prove more crucial to their success or failure.
Of 233 Democrats who will be sworn in on Thursday, 147 -- 63 percent -- have been elected since Republicans won control of the House in 1994, and have never served in the majority. Those whose service predates the 1994 revolution, on the other hand, number only 86, or 37 percent. But it is this core of senior Democrats, Mr. Dingell among them, who will lead 20 of the 21 major committees and so exercise concentrated legislative power.
The differences in tenure tend to manifest themselves geographically as well. The makeup of the senior membership has a more urban flavor, while those more recently elected tend to come from the suburbs and exurbs. These newer members have faced tougher electoral opposition than their older counterparts, who in many cases represent overwhelmingly safe Democratic districts; a majority of new chairmen have traditional liberal roots.
Lawmakers, senior aides and analysts say the institutional gulf is not necessarily problematic and could even prove beneficial if Democratic leaders are able to harness the experience and skill of the chairmen to the enthusiasm and drive for reform exhibited by the newcomers.
But they worry that it could become a distraction if the ''old bulls,'' as they are sometimes called, believe that less seasoned lawmakers are demanding too much too fast or if the newer members see the veterans as representative of Congressional inertia.
''The guys who have been there for a while and built up seniority saw an abuse of the system, so they know firsthand why it has to change,'' said Representative Rahm Emanuel of Illinois, who will be chairman of the Democratic caucus. ''The new members ran on an agenda of why it has to be changed.
''If managed correctly, you have the experience and energy to make changes. If not managed correctly, it has the potential to be a fault line.''
Leading House Democrats say the long-tenured members and those sent to Congress in recent elections broadly agree on a desire to move ahead on social programs, ethics, energy, national security and fiscal responsibility. The differences, they say, are subtler. Do issues studied in the previous Congress, for instance, need a full further examination in committee, in deference to the new chairmen? Is there need for a separate commission to scrutinize war contracting, or should this too be the province of the committees?
In any event, it is clear that the lower classmen, particularly the large and celebrated group of 30 freshmen, want to move quickly.
''The new class coming in and some of the other newer members are absolutely committed to delivering on the agenda we talked about during the election,'' said Representative Chris Van Hollen of Maryland, who will lead the House Democratic campaign effort for 2008. ''Now that we are in power, we want to make sure that we are changing direction in Washington, and that means following through not just on the big print but the fine print, a break with business as usual.''
Representative-elect Ed Perlmutter, Democrat of Colorado, agreed.
''I don't think the chairs are not looking to be aggressive,'' Mr. Perlmutter said, ''but I do see in this freshman class a real desire to make changes and move things along quickly, because I think that was the direction we were given by our voters.''
Senior Democrats say that as the lawmakers who endured minority status for so long, they are the ones most painfully aware of a need for new direction. Their stake in holding on to a majority, they say, means protecting and advancing the careers of new lawmakers, who in many cases were elected with fund-raising and other help from senior Democrats.
''It is not like we are just now meeting for the first time,'' said Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, who will be chairman of the House Financial Services Committee and can tick off the names of junior committee members he has worked with, as well as several freshmen he personally supported. ''We all campaigned for these guys.''
Mr. Dingell said an urge to remake the House was hardly anything new.
''This is a normal phenomenon which occurs in this place every two years,'' he said, ''and I have seen no class come in that could be described as different. We all come here just dying to do something. But the smart ones of us know how to get it done by working within the system. I have no fears they are out to burn the place down.''
But Norman Ornstein, a longtime Congressional observer at the American Enterprise Institute, said he saw competing drives among members of the new majority.
''You have a significant number of Democrats who think the major change is that the whip is now in their hands and it is the Republicans taking the lash,'' Mr. Ornstein said. ''A number of others want to keep the spigots running, but just into their own pockets. Those who genuinely want to change the House -- the way it operates, the culture of Washington -- have their work cut out for them.''
The Democrats' leader, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the incoming speaker, has been in the House since 1987 but has never been chairwoman of a committee, and so in some respects her role may be that of an outsider free to pursue transformation. In one of her first tests, however, some seven weeks ago, many of those headed for chairmanships opposed her push to install Representative John P. Murtha of Pennsylvania as majority leader. Instead, they backed Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, at least partly because they saw him as a check on Mrs. Pelosi's power. Mr. Hoyer went on to win.
Mrs. Pelosi has told allies that while she respects the authority of the new chairmen, she will not allow them to dominate the party agenda or stall legislative initiatives that have broad support. And she has already indicated that she does not intend to send the party's early legislative initiatives back through the committee process, but will instead bring a minimum-wage increase and energy and health bills, among others, straight to the floor.
Democrats senior and junior say they are watching to see whether their ideals merge or collide. But they view party differences as just another factor they will have to take into account as they assume control.
''I think people understand it is a little bit of a bump and we have to deal with it,'' Mr. Frank said.
Michael Arcuri, a moderate Democrat from upstate New York who won a Republican-held seat in November, said the combination of exuberance and experience should prove an advantage for the party.
''If we strike the balance between the two,'' Mr. Arcuri said, ''we are going to accomplish some pretty incredible things.''
Correction:  January 9, 2007, Tuesday  An article last Tuesday about possible divisions among Democrats in Congress misstated the number of Democratic freshmen in the House. It is 42, not 30. (Democrats took over 30 Republican-held seats and 12 seats that had been vacated by Democrats.)
	Less than 24 hours after taking over as speaker, Representative Nancy Pelosi summoned the new chairmen of five committees with responsibility for various aspects of Iraq policy to her office to review and coordinate plans for hearings and inquiries.
The gathering on Friday would have been unthinkable when Democrats last controlled the House. In the days before the 1994 Republican takeover, all-powerful Democratic chairmen ruled their committees with impunity, doing what they wanted, when they wanted, with little regard to the views of the speaker or others in the upper ranks.
Now the new Democratic leaders of the House and Senate want to avoid a return to that era by forging a working relationship with the men and women who will actually write the bills and lead the Congressional investigations. Top lawmakers acknowledge that finding a way to keep the overarching goals of the party from clashing with the objectives of the independent chairmen will be crucial to keeping Democratic control from spiraling out of control.
''The challenge of maintaining a coherent message even though the power in the Senate is so diffuse is probably our major challenge,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, the Senate's third-ranking Democrat.
Already there are signs of discord. Senator Max Baucus of Montana, the Finance Committee chairman who has been a headache for past Democratic leaders, says he will plunge ahead with hearings next week on giving the government power to negotiate Medicare drug prices with pharmaceutical companies -- a top Democratic priority he has opposed and one the House plans to speed through with no new scrutiny.
''If we want to do legislation, I want to get the facts first,'' said Mr. Baucus, who broke with colleagues in the past on the Bush administration's tax cuts.
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who won re-election as an independent but kept his seniority within the Democratic Party and will lead the Homeland Security panel, is making his colleagues nervous as they consider his differences with many of them over the war and antiterror issues.
In the House, Representative Charles B. Rangel of New York, who as chairman of the Ways and Means Committee will be the gatekeeper for critical tax and social policy, suggested Friday that he might revisit new Democratic rules forcing lawmakers to disclose their sponsorship of tax breaks for small enterprises. And Representative John D. Dingell of Michigan, the chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, has broken with fellow Democrats over the years on an issue likely to return in this session, imposing tougher mileage standards on automakers.
''I am a member of the team and I am going to be a team player, but it is too early to see how it is going to develop,'' Mr. Dingell said of the new relationship between leadership and the chairmen.
During four decades of Democratic rule ending in 1994, committee chairmen amassed almost unchallenged authority, often becoming more feared and influential than the elected leadership. They were nearly impossible to budge from their perches, and the concept of term limits was unimaginable. In a move that caught some new Democratic chairmen by surprise, House rules pushed through by the Democrats this week retained the six-year limit on chairmen imposed by Republicans, but the leadership reassured lawmakers they would revisit the restrictions when there was less attention focused on the dawn of the Democratic era.
Mr. Dingell is a holdover from those days of dominant Democratic chairmen, men like Dan Rostenkowski on Ways and Means, Jack Brooks on Judiciary and Jamie Whitten on Appropriations. Those and other lawmakers saw themselves as legislative forces and the leadership as a nuisance to be negotiated on the way to the floor. Mr. Dingell said his contemporaries in the days before Republican rule were descendants of earlier strong-willed chairman like Wilber Mills.
''We simply carried on a tradition which was there, which was accepted, which was proper and which, very frankly, worked,'' Mr. Dingell said.
But the delegation of such power to the chairmen came with a price. Republicans derided Democrats as arrogant and pushed the image of out-of-touch Democrats as a campaign slogan, riding it and Democratic gaffes to majority status in 1994.
Once installed, the new Republican leadership moved quickly to centralize power in the offices of speaker, majority leader and whip. They stripped chairmen of the power to control their own legislation, enacted term limits and forced prospective chairmen to plead their case with the leadership and bolster it with a record of campaign contributions.
Incoming Democrats said Republicans went too far in diminishing the authority of chairmen and fostered arrogance at the leadership level.
Now Democrats say they hope to strike a more productive balance, giving chairmen some leeway as long as they operate in concert with their fellow committee leaders and with the leadership's approval.
''It is the right mix,'' said Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the Financial Services Committee. ''We have to work together and we don't want to do things that are discordant, but the leadership should not micromanage.''
As an example, Mr. Frank said he informed Mrs. Pelosi that he intended to schedule oversight hearings quickly on administration problems in replacing housing along the Gulf of Mexico after Hurricane Katrina. Mr. Frank said he also planned initiatives to help lower-income Americans buy housing and to give corporate shareholders more say in executive compensation.
Representative Henry A. Waxman of California, the chairman of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee -- renamed to put the emphasis on oversight -- said he had no qualms about clearing his agenda with the leadership and believed such cooperation should not impinge on his own goals.
''I don't think it is inconsistent,'' said Mr. Waxman, who said his panel would most likely begin hearings this month. ''We are going to pursue the most important theme we can deal with: whether taxpayers' money is wasted through fraud and abuse.''
Through the meeting she convened on Friday and conversations with other lawmakers, Mrs. Pelosi has shown she considers herself firmly in charge of the House and is not going to let the chairmen set the pace.
The initial Democratic legislative program is not being routed through committee -- perhaps not even the Rules Committee. But Mr. Frank and others said the new chairmen were comfortable with that approach if it helped to make a quick impression. In general, House leadership aides said they believed they could keep the chairmen and the rank-and-file moving in tandem, though they expected some feuds. Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the majority leader, has scheduled the first weekly meeting with House chairmen for Tuesday.
Tom Daschle, the former Senate majority leader who occasionally found himself at odds with committee leaders during his tenure, said communication was essential in a legislative body where lawmakers could be such independent operators.
''The key is to just try to realize you are going to have low-maintenance and high-maintenance chairs and you have to work with both,'' Mr. Daschle said. ''You have to personalize your relationship with each or you are going to have trouble.''
Mr. Daschle, a close ally of Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the new majority leader, said he was confident Mr. Reid had the skills to manage the sometimes delicate relationship. Some incoming chairmen agree.
Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut, the chairman of the Banking Committee, said Mr. Reid had already diplomatically sounded him out on his plans. ''We are very much in sync on this,'' said Mr. Dodd, who is considering legislation to protect consumers from credit card marketing fraud and high-risk mortgages. ''I am not going to do anything without letting Harry Reid know what we are going to do.''
Mr. Baucus said he sees himself in broad agreement with Mr. Reid.
''Nine times out of 10, Harry Reid and I will agree,'' he said. ''But when we disagree, I have to do what is right. I am elected by the people of Montana, and they are my employers.''
Correction:  January 13, 2007, Saturday  A front-page article on Sunday about the power of committee leaders in Congress misspelled the given name of a former Democratic chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee. He was Wilbur Mills of Arkansas, not Wilber.
	The House overwhelmingly approved a $2.10-an-hour increase in the federal minimum wage on Wednesday, in a vote that Democrats hailed as overdue and a symbol of new leadership on Capitol Hill.
The Democrats, who campaigned against Republicans last year for repeatedly allowing Congressional pay raises when they were in the majority and yet refusing for almost a decade to raise the wage floor from $5.15, said the new, three-step increase for hard-pressed employees would be in sharp contrast to Republican tax cuts approved for the affluent.
''This is the day for the people who empty the bedpans, change the bed linens, sweep the floors and do the hardest work of America,'' Representative Robert E. Andrews, Democrat of New Jersey, said before the 315-to-116 vote.
Several Republicans spoke against the legislation, a centerpiece of the House Democrats' 100-hour domestic legislative agenda, on the ground that it would reduce the number of available jobs and so deny opportunities to those trying to enter the work force. But 82 Republicans joined all 233 Democrats in supporting the bill, unwilling to cast a vote that could have made them appear unsympathetic to Americans trying to get by on a minimum wage that has not been raised since September 1997.
''Let's not trample on the market, but recognize that nine years is long enough,'' said Representative Zach Wamp, Republican of Tennessee.
The measure would increase the minimum wage to $5.85 an hour 60 days after being signed into law, to $6.55 one year after that, and to $7.25 after an additional year. For a minimum-wage employee working full time, $7.25 would mean about $4,000 a year more than the current floor.
But the House vote is far from the final word. The legislation now goes to the Senate, where members of both parties have indicated that they intend to tie it to tax breaks for small businesses, to help offset any new costs arising from the wage increase. Linking the two is seen by many as a prerequisite to rounding up the 60 votes needed to overcome any filibuster and open the door to negotiations between the House and the Senate over a final bill. President Bush has indicated that he would sign a bill providing for a wage increase with related tax breaks.
''The 110th Congress is going to do the right thing and finally deliver a minimum-wage increase,'' the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, said Wednesday. ''And at the same time, we should help keep jobs available to America's workers by helping small businesses absorb this wage hike.''
In recent years, Republicans repeatedly rebuffed Democratic proposals to raise the minimum, arguing that it could slow the economy. Under pressure from Republicans in swing districts, the leadership last year did allow a vote on an increase, but tied it to a repeal of the estate tax. Democrats, backed by organized labor and other interests, blocked that proposal in the Senate.
During the fall campaign, Democrats made inaction on the minimum wage a mainstay of their arguments against Republican control. Breaking an informal agreement with Republicans not to trade partisan charges over Congressional pay, they contrasted the stalled minimum-wage rate and lawmakers' regular cost-of-living increases. Trying to insulate themselves, the Republicans agreed late last year that Congress would get no more pay raises until a minimum-wage increase was approved.
On Wednesday, Republicans criticized Democrats for blocking any efforts to change the House measure by including small-business tax breaks.
''It is troubling that this bill gives no thought to softening the impact on our engines of new job growth,'' said Representative Wally Herger, Republican of California.
But Democrats were determined to raise the wage floor with no strings attached.
''Can't you just give these workers an increase and be done with it?'' Representative George Miller, Democrat of California and the new chairman of the Education and Labor Committee, asked his colleagues.
Despite their longstanding opposition, two mainstays of the Washington business lobby -- the United States Chamber of Commerce and the National Federation of Independent Business -- made only a perfunctory effort to influence the House vote, sending members letters of opposition but otherwise conceding the issue.
''It was a foregone conclusion,'' said Michael J. Donohue, a spokesman for the federation, which represents small businesses. ''Our lobbyists assessed that this wasn't the best way to spend their energy.''
The vote was celebrated by organized labor, which is seeing its influence in Congress enhanced with the return of a Democratic majority. But John J. Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., joined with Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts and a longtime advocate of the wage increase, in urging the Senate to pass the measure without offsetting benefits for businesses.
''Business has enjoyed hundreds of billions of dollars in tax cuts since Bush took office,'' Mr. Sweeney said in a statement, ''while health care, secure retirements and the minimum wage have all been on government's back burner.''
On the House floor, meanwhile, Speaker Nancy Pelosi beamed after the final vote as she brought down her gavel and Democrats cheered the lopsided margin.
THE 110TH CONGRESS
	