Nestled in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains outside this village in northern New Mexico, the Pecos Benedictine Monastery has long been considered cut from a different cloth from many other Roman Catholic religious communities.
Its chapel is in a structure that, more than 50 years ago, was part of a dude ranch where burnt-out urbanites came to relax. The gift shop is in an old adobe building that was a stop on the Pony Express. Solar panels adorn much of the stucco complex, a well-known location for combining the study of Christian spirituality and Jungian dream analysis.
The monastery acquired much of its open-minded character in the 1970's, when followers of the Charismatic Renewal Movement, which emphasized healing through prophecy and prayer, as well as speaking in tongues and a welcoming approach to women, arrived here. Men and women were drawn to Pecos and stayed, forming an unusual monastery where both monks and nuns had close contact, worshipping, eating, conducting retreats and raising honeybees together.
But the monastery today is going through a rough transition. After an effort last October to attain canonical status for the five women at the monastery, who were considered nuns by the 15 monks living here, the women were told by the Vatican that they were not nuns in the opinion of the church.
The Vatican recommended that the women move to a convent in Jonesboro, Ark., for a novitiate of one year, a period to prepare them to take their final vows. After that, the Vatican said, the women would be allowed to return to Pecos to create their own convent, but must restrict their daily contact with the monks during meals and worship.
''Unfortunately, the sisters were not aware of the nuances of pursuing the canonical status,'' said the Rev. Christopher Zielinski, 52, an Ohioan who took over as the monastery's abbot two years ago after living more than 30 years in Italy. ''It's been a trauma for us to have to go through this.''
Despite living in Pecos for many years, three of the women, Hilary Case, Ann Cic and Therese Gonneville, decided to leave the monastery altogether rather than submit to the requests from Rome. Two went to a monastic community of about 30 women in the Pacific Northwest, while another may go to a monastery in Hawaii.
''I don't feel comfortable commenting,'' Ms. Gonneville said, speaking by telephone from her new home at the St. Placid Priory in Olympia, Wash. The two other women did not respond to telephone messages seeking comment. The two remaining women at Pecos Benedictine Monastery, Miriam Randall and Helen Vasquez, also did not respond to requests for an interview.
The strife concerning the nuns, which was made public in a recent article in The Santa Fe New Mexican, has generated concern about the monastery beyond its 1,200 acres of land hugging the Pecos River. Residents of Pecos who grew up near the monastery had watched it evolve over the years, from its founding in 1955 as an all-male Benedictine community.
''It's a step backward for a place that was so eye-opening and tolerant,'' said Janice Varela, 47, a community organizer with the New Mexico Acequia Association who lives in Pecos and remembers going to youth retreats at the monastery.
The monastery became affiliated with the Olivetan Congregation of Italy in the 1980's, figuring the Olivetans had recognized religious communities housing both women and men in Europe in the past, though those arrangements generally involved greater separation between monks and nuns, Father Zielinski said.
''There's always a risk of not being congruent with the aims and missions of the church when things are done ad hoc,'' said the Rev. Robert J. Kaslyn, a professor of canon law at Catholic University in Washington.
Still, Father Zielinski said in an interview that he had reached an accommodation with church officials that would prevent the two remaining women at the monastery from decamping to Arkansas for a novitiate. Instead, he said he would ask the Archdiocese of Santa Fe for a decree recognizing the women as nuns. In addition, Father Zielinski said arrangements would be made to provide the women and future nuns with a deed to some of the property at the monastery in an effort to give them some financial independence.
Father Zielinski said he saw wisdom in the new arrangement. He said it would give the women greater autonomy and formalize their status at the complex, preventing a future abbot, for example, from deciding that women were not welcome at Pecos and turning them out.
Meanwhile, other challenges, largely financial, weigh on the entire monastery as it searches for ways to reduce its reliance on the donations that account for about a third of its budget. In a plan that might focus even further attention on the monastery, it has formed a venture with another New Mexico cloister, the Monastery of Christ in the Desert of Abiquiú, to open a brewery on the grounds at Pecos.
As in its troubled efforts to reconcile the intermingling of men and women, the idea for the brewery, whose product would be called Monk's Ale, is to find a way to allow the monastery to survive well into this century with its character intact.
''Pecos,'' Father Zielinski said, ''can have a prophetic role in the renewal of religious life in the church.''
Religion Journal
	President Hugo Chávez has begun forging a single Socialist party among his varied supporters, one of his recent efforts to create momentum for far-reaching changes to Venezuela's political system that analysts say will effectively concentrate greater political power in his hands.
Mr. Chávez formally announced the plan for the single party, called the United Socialist Party of Venezuela, in a speech last month to supporters here. He reminded them of his 23-percentage-point margin of victory when he was re-elected last month to a six-year term.
''Those votes don't belong to any party.'' Mr. Chávez said. ''They belong to Chávez and the people.''
Since then the swiftness and boldness of Mr. Chávez's attempt to create such a large party tied so closely to his personal leadership have created concern, even among sympathetic political analysts, that the step would effectively turn Venezuela into a one-party state.
In an essay published on Aporrea, an influential pro-Chávez blog, Edgardo Lander, a sociologist at the Central University of Venezuela, questioned the reasoning behind forming a single political party described as Socialist when the definition of the ''21st-century Socialism'' that Mr. Chávez aspires to build remained extremely vague.
''Isn't the cart being placed in front of the ox?'' Mr. Lander wrote. ''What future, from the point of view of pluralism and democracy, lies ahead for a political organization decreed in this fashion?''
Analysts more critical of Mr. Chávez have drawn a parallel with Fidel Castro's successful effort to create a single ruling party in Cuba in the early 1960s.
Mr. Chávez has tried to assuage concerns that his project would lead to authoritarianism by saying party leaders would largely be chosen by his rank-and-file supporters, an idea lambasted by critics here. ''His tireless finger won't stop singling out those who are going to be the bosses,'' said Teodoro Petkoff, the editor of the opposition-aligned newspaper Tal Cual.
Some of Mr. Chávez's supporters say the creation of a single party would strengthen the government's hand in combating excessive bureaucracy and corruption stemming from the need to distribute political spoils to an array of different parties. Others view the new party as a way to remain ahead of a fractious opposition.
The move has already revealed tensions within the coalition of more than 20 political parties that currently supports the president. Critics of the plan say it could marginalize relatively small pro-Chávez parties that support an open economy, existing government institutions and a pluralistic political system.
By contrast, much of the support comes from more hard-line members of Mr. Chávez's own party, the Fifth Republic Movement, which was dissolved last month to make way for its larger successor.
Some of those supporters want to strengthen parallel political institutions created by Mr. Chávez, like a system of health clinics and universities closely tied to the president and his Socialist project for the nation.
For instance, he has announced a plan to build as many as 50 new universities, expected to be modeled on the three-year-old Bolivarian University of Venezuela, which provides Socialist-inspired, tuition-free classes to more than 170,000 students.
''We're witnessing a struggle between two ideological currents within the Chavista movement,'' said Steve Ellner, a political scientist at University of the East in Venezuela.
Some of the strongest resistance comes from Mr. Chávez's allies on the far left. The Communist Party, in particular, stands to lose considerable stature if it folds into the new party, though it is expected to do so.
The Communists have weathered decades of persecution and the collapse of the Soviet Union. ''The Communist Party was created to defend the workers and should continue this struggle,'' Jerónimo Carrera, a senior party official, told the newspaper El Nacional.
Mr. Chávez's critics on the left and right regularly say he is carrying out a ''fake revolution'' exemplified by a boom in consumer spending on imported goods and the distribution of economic favors and government contracts to those who support his oil-financed administration.
But Mr. Chávez has also created thousands of agricultural and industrial cooperatives. And he has expanded the influence of ''communal councils,'' groups of 20 or so people in poor areas who make routine planning decisions and are financed by small communal banks. He said recently that he would put $2 billion at the disposal of these councils in 2007.
He still runs the risk, however remote, of losing one or two smaller but important parties in his coalition. These parties, which include Podemos and Fatherland for All, are expected to decide this month whether to join the new party.
As Mr. Chávez presses forward with that party, he seems eager to imbue senior officials with a greater understanding of Socialist ideology, as well as closer allegiance to his own wishes.
Late last year, legislators in the National Assembly, controlled by supporters of Mr. Chávez, were enrolled in classes on Marxist analysis and socialist thinking taught by professors from the National Armed Forces Experimental University.
Signaling a desire for even his highest-ranking allies to fall into step with what he calls his Bolivarian Revolution, Mr. Chávez publicly dressed down Vice President José Vicente Rangel and Interior Minister Jesse Chacón last month.
The reason? They let an orchestra omit the Panamanian anthem from an act honoring Simón Bolívar, the South American independence leader, who died 176 years ago.
''We have to struggle against such inefficiency,'' Mr. Chávez said in comments broadcast on the state television. ''What a shame to have such disorganization for such a sublime event,'' he added, as a small crowd in attendance applauded.
	Energy ministers gathering here on Monday for a meeting of OPEC members said stricter adherence to their current production quotas was needed to avoid a sharp decline in the price of oil this spring, signaling that formal output cuts could probably wait until next month.
Chakib Khelil, the oil minister of Algeria and the host of the meeting, said members were exceeding the group's quota of 24.5 million barrels a day by about 1.75 million barrels in extra daily production. His was one of several public acknowledgements by delegates that members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries were flouting quotas to profit from historically high oil prices.
Revenue from international sales by OPEC, which accounts for about a third of world oil production, surged nearly 25 percent in 2003 -- to $247 billion from $199 billion the previous year -- as oil prices climbed to their highest annual average level in two decades, according to Cambridge Energy Research Associates. This windfall has made it difficult for the 11 members of OPEC, many of them under fiscal strain, to adhere to their own quotas.
In trading in New York on Monday, crude oil futures for March delivery climbed 5 cents a barrel, to $32.53, while in London, Brent crude oil rose 12 cents, to $28.95 a barrel.
Despite predictions of softer demand as the Northern Hemisphere heads into spring, Ali al-Naimi, the oil minister of Saudi Arabia, OPEC's most powerful member, said there were ''formal and informal'' methods for reining in production. He said OPEC members needed to show greater discipline in adhering to production quotas.
There are signs that some OPEC member nations are already trying to enforce discipline on others. Saudi Arabia, for instance, reduced oil sales to large consuming nations like the United States, China and Japan by 470,000 barrels a day in October from the average in the third quarter, according to Deutsche Bank. That was an indication of Saudi Arabia's willingness to lose market share temporarily to support the present quotas, which were established at a meeting last September.
Mr. Naimi, the Saudi minister, said his nation would be pleased with an oil price of about $25 a barrel, which would be well within OPEC's self-proposed trading range of $22 to $28. OPEC's price target is the average price of crude oils of various quality; the OPEC price generally is a few dollars a barrel below the price of low-sulfur West Texas Intermediate crude that is the benchmark product in New York.
Still, other delegates gave few indications that they wanted to see prices fall to that level from their current perch of about $28.
''The current prices are at an acceptable level and we are worried about overproduction,'' Iran's oil minister, Bijan Namdar Zanganeh, and his Venezuelan counterpart, Rafael Ramirez, said in a joint statement issued Sunday in Tehran. OPEC's president, Purnomo Yusgiantoro of Indonesia, echoed those comments in a briefing with reporters at the closely guarded compound where OPEC is scheduled to convene formally on Tuesday.
''The price is in the upper part of the band, but we are also concerned about what is going to happen in the second quarter,'' Mr. Purnomo said. ''There is no room for OPEC to increase production.''
Delegates to Tuesday's meeting, the first OPEC gathering held in Algeria since 1980, said they also planned to discuss the weakness of the dollar against the euro. Oil is priced in dollars, but OPEC's members trade with Europe in euros; the dollar's recent fall in value against the euro has eroded its purchasing power in Europe. Several ministers have argued that higher oil prices in recent months are justified by the declining value of the dollar.
Yet while Mr. Purnomo and Mr. Naimi, the Saudi minister, did not definitively rule out a cut at Tuesday's meeting, prices have been supported recently by various factors like sluggish production and continued uncertainty over the recovery of the oil industry in Iraq, an OPEC member, and robust demand in China. Hence, OPEC's current focus on expectations of waning demand this spring, a perennial justification for cutting output.
Demand for oil is expected to decline by 2.6 million barrels a day in the second quarter largely because of warming temperatures, according to the International Energy Agency, a Paris-based organization that tracks energy trends. The expectation of weaker seasonal demand has spurred thinking among analysts that OPEC might opt to cut production at its meeting next month in Vienna after calling for greater adherence to its current quotas in its gathering here this week.
That strategy could appease large oil consuming nations, including the United States, that have remained unusually silent in recent months about the impact of higher oil prices on their economies. Still, waiting until next month to cut production risks the possibility of a price decline if OPEC members do not stick to their own quotas. Some OPEC members, including Libya and Venezuela, have recently said they would like a trading range that allowed oil prices to be sustained above $30.
''OPEC is laughing all the way to the bank,'' said Fadel Gheit, an energy industry analyst at Oppenheimer & Company in New York, who estimated the United States pays $100 million more a day to import oil than it did three years ago.
	