It's settled. The 80's were more fun.
Aerobics, unlike elliptical machines and Pilates, were inclusive. Madonna would sing and dance and not preach. Michael Jackson still had a nose and some of his right mind. Fashion was more innovative, and so was white-collar crime: Compared with Kenneth L. Lay or Jack Abramoff, Michael Milken was a visionary genius.
And on television, cops were handsome, drove Ferrari convertibles and left autopsies and forensic technology to the lab nerds. Today's crime shows feel like homework; ''CSI: Miami'' is a buzz-kill version of ''Miami Vice.''
Why else would Michael Mann direct a movie remake of his landmark television show, starring Colin Farrell and Jamie Foxx as Crockett and Tubbs in place of Don Johnson and Philip Michael Thomas? TV Land, which will begin rerunning the original ''Miami Vice'' this weekend, provides the answer. (The first and second seasons are available on DVD.)
''Miami Vice,'' which lasted five seasons on NBC, was a revolutionary series, of course. Its influence on the look and, most of all, the sound of television drama is still evident -- nowadays, even surgeons on ''Grey's Anatomy'' cannot repair an artery without a pop music overlay. But television has also lost an 80's attribute that ''Miami Vice'' epitomized: the ability to be serious and playful at the same time.
This was a series set in primeval Miami -- before South Beach, the Russian mob, the Internet or cellphones. The jazzy introduction, copied, minus the pink flamingos, by ''CSI: Miami,'' still looks very hip. But in the premiere episode, Sonny Crockett's first undercover partner, played by Jimmy Smits, asks Crockett for a dime so he can call his wife from a pay phone. Soon after, he is killed by drug dealers (an artistically filmed car bomb explosion), making way for Crockett's new partner, Ricardo Tubbs, a New York City officer in Miami to avenge his murdered brother.
They were plainclothes detectives, but their clothes were anything but plain. Mr. Johnson, who made a three-day stubble fashionable, wore white linen suits and a holster over his pastel T-shirts. Mr. Thomas had an earring and crazily patterned shirts. By today's standards, the sedans and women's hairstyles look huge, as do girls' bikinis at the beach, yet Crockett and Tubbs still look very cool. (It helps that Crockett smoked.) They did not take themselves too seriously. Crockett kept a pet alligator on his boat, and both he and his partner liked to race their sports cars and ogle girls. They could make each other laugh.
They were hardened, dedicated officers, but they also made their fair share of blunders, mistakes and dumb assumptions. They were dissolute but human, gritty but glamorous: the MTVification of ''Hill Street Blues.'' Two decades later, and in defiance of reality, fictional cops on television exude infallible competence and unflagging professionalism, most painfully in the various ''CSI'' series, but also ''Law & Order'' and all its spinoffs.
Lounging in his convertible, Crockett awaits the signal for an early morning sting operation with gruff nonchalance. ''What's the E.T.A. on these huckleberries?'' he asks a surveillance officer over a hidden radio. At crime scenes on ''CSI: Miami,'' Horatio Caine (David Caruso) is an officious pedant. ''On the contrary,'' he tells a detective who fears the worst about a missing girl. ''There is a chance she is alive, and we are going to find her.''
The bad guys on ''Miami Vice'' were drug dealers, hitmen and the Colombian cartel -- and sometimes the federal government. (Crockett refers to government agents as ''G-boys.'') In one 1989 episode, Washington interferes to protect a corrupt and homicidal Latin American general (Ian McShane in his pre-''Deadwood'' days). When Crockett and Tubbs try to arrest him, they are stopped by a flinty secret agent. ''Take a look at the map, Crockett, real estate is turning red all over this hemisphere,'' the agent snarls. ''Only two things count: American interests and anything that is counter to them.''
It is a bit odd to watch a world in which Communism was still a threat, and drug lords had to steal their rocket-propelled grenade launchers from American military bases, and not simply buy them from wayward republics of the former Soviet Union. It's amusing to see famous actors playing bit parts -- ''Miami Vice'' served as a starter show for all kinds of celebrities: Julia Roberts, Bruce Willis, Miles Davis and even G. Gordon Liddy.
Most of all, ''Miami Vice'' is a portal back to an era of confidence and good humor, when even the dark side of life had its lighter moments.
Miami Vice
TV Land, tomorrow at noon and 1 p.m., Eastern and Pacific times; 11 a.m. and noon, Central time; next Friday at 2 and 3 a.m., Eastern and Pacific times; 1 and 2 a.m., Central time.
TV WEEKEND
	What a difference a terrorist attack makes.
''Traffic,'' the three-part mini-series that starts tonight on the USA Network, is the third drug-trade thriller by that name. As gripping as Steven Soderbergh's 2000 movie or the 1989 British mini-series ''Traffik,'' this version is a look at the war on drugs through the prism of Sept. 11. Heroin is the least of it; there are more imminent threats to American society, including Al Qaeda terrorists who use drug routes to smuggle weapons into Seattle.
The mini-series is not a remake in the same way there are multiple renditions of ''The Prisoner of Zenda'' or ''A Star Is Born.'' But like remakes, each ''Traffic'' reflects the mores of its period and culture, and ours is evidently not a time for ambivalence or fatalism.
The USA ''Traffic'' follows the template laid out by the British mini-series, which Mr. Soderbergh borrowed for his movie -- four interconnected, cross-cutting story lines -- to make an entirely different point. Mr. Soderbergh's jittery, operatic movie, centered on the United States and Mexico, was very distinct in tone and sensibility from the understated British mini-series set in Pakistan, Germany and Britain, but both of those works were infused with despair and cynicism.
This ''Traffic'' gives a bleak, mesmerizing portrait of an insidious, intractable criminal underworld, but there is not the same sense of futility. American law enforcement may be fighting a losing battle against traffickers, but a few tough men can make a difference.
The series has two such heros: Mike McKay (Elias Koteas), a United States Drug Enforcement Administration field agent who infiltrates opium smuggling clans in Afghanistan, and Adam Kadyrov (Cliff Curtis), a cabdriver and Chechen immigrant in Seattle whose wife and child drown with dozens of other illegal immigrants when a freighter sinks. Both men operate outside the law, but neither seems confused about right and wrong.
The story opens with Mike talking by cellphone to his wife, Carole (Mary McCormack), back home in Seattle about a routine day that included a shootout with Afghan smugglers. (Different times, different Fazals: in the British mini-series, Fazal was a Pakistani opium grower who cannot earn a living any other way; when the Afghan Fazal makes the same excuse to his American captor, Mike scoffs and tells him he is not a farmer, he is a ''middleman.'')
Mr. Koteas plays Mike with the same weary toughness that Robert De Niro's ex-C.I.A. agent showed in the movie ''Ronin,'' so when he suddenly shakes loose from his partner, Brent (Martin Donovan), to go AWOL with a group of Afghan drug smugglers, viewers are safe in assuming there is more to his story. His adventures galloping on horseback across Afghan plains, AK47's and Claymore mines crammed in his saddlebags, are cross cut with the more mundane dangers faced by his wife and lonely 15-year-old son, Tyler (Justin Chatwin), who do not understand why they are under surveillance by the D.E.A. in Seattle.
Shadowy forces of corruption also surface along the coastline of Seattle, where fishermen scoop up a dead body in their net, then hurriedly throw it back. Other corpses start to float to port, illegal immigrants killed when the freighter that was smuggling them into the United States sank.
When Adam realizes that his wife and child died in that accident, he goes on an obsessive search for an explanation of why it sank. His ferocious desire to know such a dangerous secret contrasts sharply with the willful blindness of Ben (Balthazar Getty), a young M.B.A. who inherits his father's failing garment import business and ends up working as a money launderer for the local Chinese crime boss, Ronny Cho (Nelson Lee).
Seattle is not known for its teeming Chechen neighborhoods, so it safe to assume that the screenwriters wanted a Muslim hero to balance the otherwise rather sinister array of Afghan murderers and thieves. But a Chechen background makes sense to explain Adam's tenacity; there is nothing like decades of Soviet rule and invasion by Russian troops to sharpen one's sense of vengeance and mistrust.
Middlemen are the most vividly drawn villains of the series, starting with Ronny Cho, the slick, flinty import-export boss, down to the Pakistani storekeepers and corrupt ship captains who keep the ports open to illegal trade. Previous versions looked higher up the social ladder: Mr. Soderbergh's film dwelled on the collaboration of the ruling classes: rich private school kids using cocaine (including the drug czar's own teenage daughter), a drug lord's trophy wife determined to keep her husband's fortune intact, a Mexican general who is on the take.
In this ''Traffic'' there is almost no sign of the high and mighty. There is one glimpse of the rich: Adam's sister-in-law works as a maid for a wealthy American family. Seeking help, he goes to their stunning modern glass house -- all open spaces -- and they shut him out, not unmoved by his story, but too scared to get involved. Theirs is a sin of omission, not collaboration.
That, too, is a post-Sept. 11 sensibility. Safe times embolden paranoia, the luxury of linking corruption and conspiracy all the way to the top. At more dangerous moments, there is less inclination to imagine the worst. ''Traffic,'' seeks merely to show how bad things can get.
TRAFFIC  The Mini-Series
USA, tonight, tomorrow and Wednesday at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time
Directed by Stephen Hopkins and Eric Bross; written by Ron Hutchinson; produced by Jay Benson, Bill Boyes, Mr. Hopkins and Mr. Hutchinson; music by Jeff Rona. Produced by Galway Bay Productions.
WITH: Martin Donovan (Brent Delaney), Elias Koteas (Mike McKay), Cliff Curtis (Adam Kadyrov), Balthazar Getty (Ben Edmonds), Nelson Lee (Ronny Cho), Ritchie Coster (Fazal), Mary McCormack (Carole McKay) and Justin Chatwin (Tyler McKay).
TELEVISION REVIEW
	