FOOLS RUSH IN
Steve Case, Jerry Levin, and the
Unmaking of AOL Time Warner.
By Nina Munk.
Illustrated. 352 pp. New York:
HarperBusiness. $26.95.
THERE MUST BE A PONY IN HERE SOMEWHERE
The AOL Time Warner Debacle and
the Quest for a Digital Future.
By Kara Swisher with Lisa Dickey.
Illustrated. 306 pp. New York:
Crown Business. $24.95.
The catastrophic merger of America Online and Time Warner, announced in January 2000 and completed a year later, was, Kara Swisher writes, ''the heist of the very new century.'' AOL, which sells access to the Internet over telephone lines, managed to buy a storied media conglomerate that included Time magazine, the Warner Brothers movie studio, CNN, theme parks and book publishers, using wildly inflated dot-com wampum.
Why AOL would want to convert its overvalued stock into something more tangible, as the economic fever of the late 1990's spiked, was obvious. You might even call the acquisition savvy, except that it now appears that AOL's numbers were doubly inflated, both by mania and by questionable accounting. The tougher question is why in the world Gerald M. Levin, the chairman of Time Warner, decided to sell his company to a boring, dinky Internet service provider, or I.S.P., that was about to be swamped by faster services, including Time Warner's own cable systems.
In 2002, Robert Hughes, Time magazine's art critic, put that question to Levin in an e-mail message later published in Tina Brown's column in a London newspaper. ''How can I convey to you the disgust which your name awakens in me?'' Hughes asked. ''How can you face yourself knowing how much history, value and savings you have thrown away on your mad, ignorant attempt to merge with a wretched dial-up I.S.P.?'' At least three books have now tried to answer that question, and a fourth is on the way.
''Fools Rush In,'' by Nina Munk, a contributing editor at Vanity Fair, is the best so far. Marrying exemplary reporting with lively, lucid writing, she makes a convincing -- nay, devastating -- case that Levin wrecked the legacy of Henry Luce, the founder of Time Inc., in the service of his ego. Levin wanted to redeem his weak performance at the company's helm with what he liked to call a transforming transaction.
He had already transformed Time once, in 1990, when he helped engineer its merger with Warner Communications. That was another lousy deal. What he transformed in the AOL merger was $200 billion of his shareholders' money into nothing.
There is a larger point in Munk's acid portrait. No one stood up to Levin, though many later claimed to have seen the folly of the AOL deal. Levin had become, in his own words, an ''imperial C.E.O.'' Such chief executives, abetted by pliant boards, submissive underlings and craven accountants, bankers and lawyers, have the sort of arbitrary power of which despots can only dream.
Levin, who provided plenty of access to the authors of all three of the books on the merger, does not come off well in any of them, but he reserved his flakiest comments for Munk. ''It's absolutely true that I plotted the departure of Nick Nicholas after working with him for 20 years,'' Levin told her about the palace coup that got him the top job at Time Warner in 1992. ''And I don't have justifications for it other than that I'm a strange person.'' He did cite Albert Camus by way of explanation. As he explained to Munk in another context, his own philosophy was rooted in what he learned from Camus: ''That we impute meaning and purpose to things that are totally adventitious or accidental; that there is no God; that there just is; that there's no life after death.'' Fine for grad school, and probably true, but not exactly suited to the boardroom.
Levin's counterpart at AOL, Stephen M. Case, is famously bland, a vague and uninteresting figure. He likes khakis and expensive wine, and it is a good bet that he hasn't been reading much Camus lately. Levin has called him an ''automaton,'' with ''no spirituality.''
But Case was a good judge of character. In approaching Levin about the merger, he immediately offered to make Levin chief executive officer. ''If he'd said anything else, there's no way I would have gone ahead,'' Levin told Munk (minus a swear word for emphasis between ''no'' and ''way'').
Levin is gone now, having resigned from the company in December 2001. Case remains on its board, though he stepped down as chairman in May 2003. Time Warner reclaimed its maiden name last October. Case remains very rich, having sold hundreds of millions of dollars worth of AOL stock just before and during the merger. Levin was not a seller, and he rode the stock all the way down. That is a testament to his integrity and his obtuseness both.
''Stealing Time,'' another book about the merger, by Alec Klein of The Washington Post, came out last summer. It is a meaty, brisk and conventional work, based on Klein's vigorous investigation of AOL's unorthodox accounting methods. Klein's achievements really come to life, oddly, in Munk's book. In a riveting passage, Munk describes AOL Time Warner's disgraceful efforts to bully The Post into spiking Klein's articles. The company, itself the home of some of the nation's most respected journalists and a supposed friend of the First Amendment, reacted to questions from Klein by hiring one of the nation's most feared libel lawyers, Thomas Yannucci, and threatening to sue. The shameful episode captures in an anecdote Levin's folly in allowing AOL's corrosive values to find a home in his company. The Post, needless to say, did not bend.
With ''There Must Be a Pony in Here Somewhere,'' Kara Swisher, a technology columnist for The Wall Street Journal, has written a breezy, entertaining and glib book about ''the AOL Time Warner debacle,'' but it is only nominally about the merger. The deal, in Swisher's hands, is an occasion for remarks, and her book is a memoir and a manifesto. Its real burden is to make the case that, failed mergers and market collapses or no, the Internet is still important.
Swisher was a regular participant in many conferences devoted to the digital era. (Those conferences were the only consistently profitable product generated by the Internet economy.) Her book sometimes reads like comments from the dais. ''I am still a believer,'' she writes. ''In the wake of the crash, true faith in the eventual dominance of the Internet is not an easy thing to admit to. In fact, largely because of this one disastrous deal, saying you believe in the Internet as a revolutionary medium is a bit like admitting to a capital crime.''
The books by Swisher and Klein are lopsided, focused predominantly on AOL, the less interesting of the two companies. Munk is more balanced, and her digging went deeper. Sometimes, indeed, she provides too much detail: the precise amount of the mortgage payments Levin's parents made in 1932, the brand of hair gel used by an AOL salesman.
Swisher insists that AOL deserves a place in history, at least, ''by popularizing the online experience'' over the telephone. But there is no future in that, and AOL has not shown itself to be at all nimble in finding a way to make money from people who connect to the Internet at higher speeds. Swisher provides the better portrait of Ted Turner, by far the most interesting and authentic figure in the saga. Turner sold CNN and the rest of his cable empire to Time Warner in 1995 and lost $7 billion as the stock sank after the AOL merger. He was, Swisher writes, ''the voluble weather vane of the deal.''
Swisher's book's title is taken from a joke President Reagan liked to tell, later adopted by an AOL executive. Its upshot was an exclamation made by an optimistic boy encountering a pile of manure. One supposes she is making fun of Levin, Case and others, elbow deep in the synergistic muck, hoping to find something of value. But the title captures something of Swisher's own attitude. She remains, she says over and over, thoroughly optimistic about the transformative power of the Internet.
She has absorbed the jargon, certainly. Companies compete ''in the interactive space.'' Time Warner was at one point ''sniffing around the portal space.'' At another, it was ''nowhere to be found in the Internet space.'' AOL, on the other hand, was trying ''to break into the enterprise space.'' One wishes that Swisher, whose book is quite readable, had spent a little more time in the journalism space.
Adam Liptak is the national legal correspondent of The Times.
	The Bush administration has employed extraordinary secrecy in defending the National Security Agency's highly classified domestic surveillance program from civil lawsuits. Plaintiffs and judges' clerks cannot see its secret filings. Judges have to make appointments to review them and are not allowed to keep copies.
Judges have even been instructed to use computers provided by the Justice Department to compose their decisions.
But now the procedures have started to meet resistance. At a private meeting with the lawyers in one of the cases this month, the judges who will hear the first appeal next week expressed uneasiness about the procedures, said a lawyer who attended, Ann Beeson of the American Civil Liberties Union.
Lawyers suing the government and some legal scholars say the procedures threaten the separation of powers, the adversary system and the lawyer-client privilege.
Justice Department officials say the circumstances of the cases, involving a highly classified program, require extraordinary measures. The officials say they have used similar procedures in other cases involving classified materials.
In ordinary civil suits, the parties' submissions are sent to their adversaries and are available to the public in open court files. But in several cases challenging the eavesdropping, Justice Department lawyers have been submitting legal papers not by filing them in court but by placing them in a room at the department. They have filed papers, in other words, with themselves.
At the meeting this month, judges on the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit asked how the procedures might affect the integrity of the files and the appellate records.
In response, Joan B. Kennedy, a Justice Department official, submitted, in one of the department's unclassified filings, a detailed seven-page sworn statement last Friday defending the practices.
''The documents reviewed by the court have not been altered and will not be altered,'' Ms. Kennedy wrote, and they ''will be preserved securely as part of the record of this case.''
Some cases challenging the program, which monitored international communications of people in the United States without court approval, have also involved atypical maneuvering. Soon after one suit challenging the program was filed last year in Oregon, Justice Department lawyers threatened to seize an exhibit from the court file.
This month, in the same case, the department sought to inspect and delete files from the computers on which lawyers for the plaintiffs had prepared their legal filings.
The tactics, said a lawyer in the Oregon case, Jon B. Eisenberg, prompted him to conduct unusual research.
''Sometime during all of this,'' Mr. Eisenberg said, ''I went on Amazon and ordered a copy of Kafka's 'The Trial,' because I needed a refresher course in bizarre legal procedures.''
A federal district judge in the case, Garr M. King, invoked another book after a government lawyer refused to disclose whether he had a certain security clearance, saying information about the clearance was itself classified.
''Frankly, your response,'' Judge King said, ''is kind of an Alice in Wonderland response.''
Questions about the secret filings may figure in the first appellate argument in the challenges, before the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, on Wednesday. The three judges who will hear the appeal met with lawyers for the Justice Department and the American Civil Liberties Union on Jan. 8 in a judge's chambers in Memphis.
''The court raised questions about the procedures the government had used to file classified submissions in the case and the propriety and integrity of those procedures,'' said Ms. Beeson, associate legal director of the A.C.L.U., which represents the plaintiffs in the appeal.
''They were also concerned about the independence of the judiciary,'' given that ''the Justice Department retains custody and total control over the court filings.'' Ms. Beeson said.
Nancy S. Marder, a law professor at the Chicago-Kent College of Law and an authority on secrecy in litigation, said the tactics were really extreme and deeply, deeply troubling.
''These are the basics that we take for granted in our court system,'' Professor Marder said. ''You have two parties. You exchange documents. The documents you've seen don't disappear.''
A spokesman for the Justice Department, Dean Boyd, said employees involved in storing the classified documents were independent of the litigators and provided ''neutral assistance'' to courts in handling sensitive information. The documents, Mr. Boyd said, are ''stored securely and without alteration.''
The appellate argument in Cincinnati will almost certainly also concern the effects of the administration announcement last week that it would submit the program to a secret court, ending its eavesdropping without warrants.
In a brief filed on Thursday, the government said the move made the case against the program moot.
Ms. Beeson of the A.C.L.U. said the government was wrong.
At least one case, the one in Oregon, is probably not moot. It goes beyond the other cases in seeking damages from the government, because the plaintiffs say they have seen proof that they were wiretapped without a warrant.
In August 2004, the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control, which was investigating an Oregon charity, al-Haramain Islamic Foundation, inadvertently provided a copy of a classified document to a foundation lawyer, Lynne Bernabei.
That document indicated, according to court filings, that the government monitored communications between officers of the charity and two of its lawyers without a warrant in spring 2004.
''If I gave you this document today and you put it on the front page of The New York Times, it would not threaten national security,'' Mr. Eisenberg, a lawyer for the foundation, said. ''There is only one thing about it that's explosive, and that's the fact that our clients were wiretapped.''
Ms. Bernabei circulated the document to two directors of the charity, at least one of them in Saudi Arabia, and to three other lawyers. She discussed them with two more lawyers. A reporter for The Washington Post, David B. Ottaway, also reviewed the document.
The full significance of the document was apparently not clear to any recipient, more than a year before The New York Times disclosed the existence of the N.S.A. program in December 2005.
The F.B.I. learned of the disclosure almost immediately in August 2004, Judge King said at a court hearing last year, but made no effort to retrieve copies of the document for about six weeks.
When it did, everyone it asked apparently returned all copies of the document. In a statement reported in The Post in March, for instance, Mr. Ottaway said he the F.B.I. had told him that the document had ''highly sensitive national security information.''
''I returned it after consulting with Washington Post editors and lawyers, and concluding that it was not relevant to what I was working on at the time,'' Mr. Ottaway said.
In a sworn statement in June, a lawyer who had the document, Asim Ghafoor, said the bureau took custody of his laptop computer ''in order that the document might be 'scrubbed' from it.''
The computer was returned weeks later.
In February 2006, the charity and the two lawyers who say they were wiretapped sued to stop the program, requesting financial damages. They attached a copy of the classified document, filing it under seal. They have not said how they came to have a copy.
Three weeks later, the lawyers for the foundation received a call from two Justice Department lawyers. The classified document ''had not been properly secured,'' the lawyers said, according to a letter from the plaintiffs' lawyers to the judge.
As Mr. Eisenberg recalled it, the government lawyers said, ''The F.B.I. is on its way to the courthouse to take possession of the document from the judge.''
But Judge King, at a hurriedly convened hearing, would not yield it, and asked, ''What if I say I will not deliver it to the F.B.I.?''
A Justice Department lawyer, Anthony J. Coppolino, gave a measured response, saying: ''Your Honor, we obviously don't want to have any kind of a confrontation with you. But it has to be secured in a proper fashion.''
The document was ultimately deposited in a ''secure compartmented information facility'' at the bureau office in Portland.
In the meantime, copies of the document appear to have been sent abroad, and the government concedes that it has made no efforts to contact people overseas who it suspects have them.
''It's probably gone many, many places,'' Judge King said of the document at the August hearing. ''Who is it secret from?''
A Justice Department lawyer, Andrew H. Tannenbaum, replied, ''It's secret from anyone who has not seen it.''
He added, ''The document must be completely removed from the case, and plaintiffs are not allowed to rely on it to prove their claims.''
Judge King wondered aloud about the implications of that position, saying, ''There is nothing in the law that requires them to purge their memory.''
Mr. Eisenberg, in an interview, said that was precisely the government position. ''They claim they own the portions of our brains that remember anything,'' he said.
In a decision in September, Judge King ruled that the plaintiffs were not entitled to review the document again but could rely on their recollections of it. In October, they filed a motion for summary judgment, a routine step in many civil litigations. In a sealed filing, they described the classified document.
Government lawyers sent Judge King a letter saying the plaintiffs had ''mishandled information contained in the classified document'' by, among other actions, preparing filings on their own computers.
In a telephone conference on Nov. 1, Judge King appeared unpersuaded. ''My problem with your statement,'' he told Mr. Tannenbaum, ''is that you assume you are absolutely correct in everything you are stating, and I am not sure that you are.''
Mr. Boyd of the Justice Department said the government ''continues to explore with counsel ways in which the classified information may be properly protected without any intrusion on the attorney-client privilege.''
	In a four-paragraph letter on Wednesday announcing that the Bush administration had reversed its position and would submit its domestic surveillance program to judicial supervision, Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales used one phrase three times. A secret court, he said, had fashioned a way to allow the program to be monitored by the judiciary without compromising the need for ''speed and agility.''
That phrase also captures, some critics say, the administration's moving-target litigation strategy, one that often seeks to change the terms of the debate just as a claim of executive authority is about to be tested in the courts or in Congress.
On Wednesday, the administration announced that an unnamed judge on the secret court, in a nonadversarial proceeding that apparently cannot be appealed, had issued orders that apparently both granted surveillance requests and set out some ground rules for how such requests would be handled.
The details remained sketchy yesterday, but critics of the administration said they suspected that one goal of the new arrangements was to derail lawsuits challenging the program in conventional federal courts.
''It's another clear example,'' said Ann Beeson, associate legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union, ''of the government playing a shell game to avoid accountability and judicial scrutiny.''
In other cases, too, the timing of litigation decisions by the government has been suggestive.
Shortly before the Supreme Court heard a set of three detainee cases in 2004, the administration reversed course and allowed two Americans held incommunicado by the military to meet with their lawyers, mooting that issue.
After the court ruled that one of the men, Yaser Hamdi, could challenge his detention in court, the administration instead freed him and sent him to Saudi Arabia.
And just as the Supreme Court was considering whether to review the case of the second man, Jose Padilla, he was transferred to the criminal justice system last year, mooting his appeal.
Paul W. Butler, a former federal prosecutor who served as special assistant to Donald H. Rumsfeld when he was secretary of defense, said the administration's critics were too quick to view ordinary developments as nefarious ones.
''You do have to ascribe some good faith,'' said Mr. Butler, now a partner with the Washington law firm of Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld. ''The government uses presidential authority when they think it's necessary and the law does not provide the specific authority they need. If there is a road that can be taken, operating according to statutes or putting people into the criminal justice system when that makes sense, they will do that.''
Like other administrations, even when this one alters course, it almost never concedes that its earlier actions were mistaken.
In the case of the eavesdropping program, the administration continues to maintain that it is free to operate without court approval. Its decision to submit to the secret court, administration lawyers said, was voluntary. At a briefing Wednesday, almost as an afterthought, a senior Justice Department official said, ''There's obviously an advantage to having all three branches involved.''
The announcement about the surveillance program came two weeks before a federal appeals court in Cincinnati was to hear the first appellate argument about the lawfulness of the program. Government lawyers now say that case is moot, but their claim is open to question.
The usual rule is that cases seeking relief in the future are indeed moot when the relief they seek is granted. But there is an exception, said David Cole, a lawyer with the Center for Constitutional Rights, which has challenged the program in a separate lawsuit filed in New York.
He cited a series of Supreme Court decisions in which the defendants had voluntarily done what the lawsuits were seeking. Such cases are moot, the court ruled in 1968, for instance, only if it is ''absolutely clear that the allegedly wrongful behavior could not reasonably be expected to recur.''
Because the administration has reserved the right to continue the program, Mr. Cole said, the courts should rule on whether it violated a 1978 law, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act and the Constitution.
A third case, from Oregon, is almost certainly not moot. In addition to asking the court to stop surveillance without warrants in the future, that suit asks for money as damages for past surveillance.
The Oregon case, brought by an Islamic charity and two of its lawyers, differs from the Cincinnati appeal and the New York suit because the plaintiffs in it say they have seen a classified document confirming that their communications were actually intercepted.
''We're certainly center stage now,'' said Jon B. Eisenberg, who represents the charity, Al Haramain Islamic Foundation, and the lawyers.
Mr. Gonzales, speaking to the Senate Judiciary Committee yesterday said that the recent orders involved a creative reading of the 1978 law, often called FISA. After the Sept. 11 attacks, he said, administration lawyers determined that the program could not be reconciled with the law but later decided to ''push the envelope.''
Statements like that frustrate the administration's critics.
''It is very difficult to know if this order in fact satisfies FISA,'' Mr. Cole said.
Because FISA applications are one-sided affairs, with no one arguing the other side, there is no losing party who can appeal from the orders. In a letter on Wednesday, Colleen Kollar-Kotelly, the presiding judge of the 11-member court, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, said she would have no objection to the release of the relevant orders to lawmakers if the Justice Department approved.
But Mr. Gonzales indicated that the department would object to the release of at least the ''operational details'' disclosed in the orders.
THREATS AND RESPONSES: NEWS ANALYSIS
	Washington State may not deny former prisoners the right to vote simply because they are too poor to pay outstanding court costs, a state judge in Seattle ruled on Monday.
''There is simply no rational relationship between the ability to pay and the exercise of constitutional rights,'' the judge, Michael S. Spearman of King County Superior Court, wrote.
The decision could affect tens of thousands of people, according to the American Civil Liberties Union of Washington. The group brought suit to challenge a Washington law that restored the voting rights of people convicted of felonies only after they had served their time and completed all other ''requirements of the sentence, including any and all legal financial obligations.''
The A.C.L.U. sued on behalf of three former prisoners who were paying off fees and fines, with court approval, at the rate of $10 or $20 a month. ''It will likely take years before each plaintiff will be able to complete the payments,'' Judge Spearman determined.
Indeed, one plaintiff, Beverly Dubois, a 49-year-old former park ranger, found her debt growing over time. Ms. Dubois had spent nine months in jail for growing and selling marijuana. She still owes the state almost $1,900 for court costs, a county ''drug enforcement fund'' and a ''victim assessment fee.'' Though Ms. Dubois pays the state $10 a month, her debt has increased over time because of the 12 percent interest she is charged.
Fees of the sort imposed on Ms. Dubois are becoming increasingly common, legal experts said. But Washington appears to have been alone in denying the right to vote to former prisoners solely on financial grounds. Courts have generally upheld the outright denial of the right to vote to people who have been convicted of felonies.
Judge Spearman ruled that the Washington law was a violation of the equal protection provisions of the federal and state constitutions. He rejected the state's argument that all former prisoners were treated equally in that they were all required to complete the terms of their sentences, including the financial ones, before they were allowed to vote.
The correct question, Judge Spearman wrote, is whether there is a rational justification for granting the right to vote to felons who can pay their financial obligations immediately but not to those who must pay them over time. Because the state could offer no good reason for the distinction, he wrote, it amounted to impermissible discrimination on the basis of wealth.
''There is no logic in the assumption that a person in possession of sufficient resources to pay the obligation immediately is the more law-abiding citizen,'' Judge Spearman wrote. ''Indeed, the better example of respect for our justice system may very well be the indigent who manages for years to make monthly payments toward the obligation.''
State officials said they had not decided whether to appeal.
Doug Honig, a spokesman for the A.C.L.U., said Judge Spearman's decision vindicated a core right.
''It reaffirms a important principle in our democratic system,'' Mr. Honig said. ''Being poor should not stop you from being able to vote.''
	When Judge John G. Roberts Jr. appeared before the Senate Judiciary Committee in September for hearings on his nomination to the Supreme Court, all of the participants were largely improvising. It had been 11 years since the last nomination, and the legal landscape, political climate and very state of the world had changed so radically that the old templates were of little use.
Judge Samuel A. Alito Jr., on the other hand, will have a fresh road map from the Roberts hearings when he sits to face the committee Monday for his own confirmation hearings. The topics to be covered, the nature and tenor of the senators' questions, and the limits on what Judge Alito will be willing to answer will almost certainly follow the path cut in September.
But there will be distinct differences, too. Judge Roberts replaced Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, meaning that his nomination was a one-for-one, conservative-for-conservative swap. If Judge Alito is confirmed, he will replace Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, whose vote was often the fulcrum on which the Rehnquist court's decisions turned.
Judge Roberts's judicial record was, moreover, comparatively thin, a product of less than two years as a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. Judge Alito, by contrast, has produced hundreds of opinions in his 15 years on the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia. Unlike Judge Roberts, he has written at length on some of the most contentious issues of the day.
Judge Roberts was asked only a few questions about what has since become a burning issue: the scope of executive power. Several senators say they will question Judge Alito closely on the legal implications of the recently disclosed domestic surveillance program.
With the lessons of the Roberts hearings as a guide, then, here is a primer on the questions Judge Alito is likely to face and how he may be expected to answer.
Abortion
Supreme Court confirmation hearings employ a sort of code when it comes to abortion. Since nominees typically refuse to divulge their views about what the Constitution has to say on the subject, on the grounds that the issue may come before them, senators tend to ask instead about privacy and about precedent.
Roe v. Wade, the 1973 case that found a constitutional right to abortion, was largely based on the right to privacy described in a 1965 case, Griswold v. Connecticut. Senators eager to tease out some information about the fate of Roe ask instead about the validity of Griswold.
The Griswold case, which struck down a law making the use of contraceptives illegal, found a constitutional right to privacy in the ''penumbras'' and ''emanations'' of various provisions of the Bill of Rights.
Judge Robert H. Bork's harsh criticism of Griswold in his academic writings and his skepticism about the nature and scope of a constitutional right to privacy at his confirmation hearings helped doom his nomination in 1987.
A second proxy for abortion is precedent. Senator Arlen Specter, the Republican chairman of the Judiciary Committee and a supporter of abortion rights, pressed Judge Roberts, for instance, on whether the Supreme Court's reaffirmation of the core abortion right in a 1992 case, Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, made Roe a ''super-duper precedent.''
Judge Roberts did not adopt Mr. Specter's language and listed several factors on each side of the general question of when precedents should be overruled, many drawn from Casey itself.
Judge Alito may find it harder to take refuge in Casey's discussion of precedent, as the case presents something of a minefield for him. He participated in it as an appeals court judge, dissenting in 1991 from a ruling striking down a Pennsylvania law that required married women to notify their husbands before having an abortion. The Supreme Court disagreed with him in a 5-to-4 ruling the next year.
Though Judge Alito's decision in Casey was careful, technical and reflected an effort to interpret the Supreme Court's confusing abortion jurisprudence at the time, the fact that he found himself on the losing side of the most important abortion case since Roe will doubtless prompt many questions.
So, too, will a statement Mr. Alito made in a 1985 job application for a position in the Justice Department. He said he was proud to have helped advance ''legal positions in which I personally believe very strongly.'' One of those positions, he said, was that ''the Constitution does not protect a right to an abortion.''
While Judge Roberts was one of nine government lawyers who signed a brief urging the Supreme Court to overturn Roe, he said that positions he took as an advocate were not necessarily his own. Judge Alito may find it harder to distance himself, should he wish to, from his Casey dissent and his personal statement in 1985.
Presidential Power
Mr. Specter, in prepared remarks to be presented Monday, said, ''This hearing comes at a time of great national concern about the balance between civil rights and the president's national security authority,'' a reference to the domestic surveillance program. There is, he said, an apparent conflict between ''the president's constitutional war powers as commander in chief to conduct electronic surveillance'' and ''Congressional legislation in the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.''
In September, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the ranking Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, asked Judge Roberts about the scope of presidential power in the context of a 2002 Justice Department legal memorandum concerning harsh interrogations that were arguably forbidden by federal law. The Bush administration had by then disavowed aspects of the memorandum, but Mr. Leahy wanted to know about one of its more abstract assertions.
''Congress can no more interfere,'' the memorandum said, ''with the president's conduct of interrogations of enemy combatants than it can dictate strategic or tactical decisions on the battlefield.'' The Bush administration has made similar arguments in connection with the surveillance program.
Judge Roberts said the framework for analyzing the question of whether the president had exceeded his authority was in a concurring opinion by Justice Robert H. Jackson in a 1952 decision rejecting President Harry S. Truman's assertion that he had the inherent constitutional authority to seize private steel mills as a matter of national security during the Korean War.
''Where the president is acting contrary to Congressional authority,'' Judge Roberts said, ''what Justice Jackson said is, the president's authority is at its lowest ebb.''
It is not clear whether Judge Alito will also endorse Justice Jackson's approach. In a 2001 speech to the Federalist Society, a conservative legal group, Judge Alito spoke in favor of vigorous and expansive executive power. As a government lawyer, too, he frequently argued for a broad interpretation of executive authority.
Congressional Authority
Perhaps no issue engaged the senators questioning Judge Roberts more than a series of recent Supreme Court decisions limiting the ability of Congress to make federal law binding on the states or, sometimes, to legislate on a subject at all.
Judge Alito may expect questions about two of his decisions in this area. In one, a 1996 dissent, he voted to strike down a federal law regulating machine guns, saying Congress had not provided adequate evidence that those weapons facilitated crimes with an effect on interstate commerce.
In a similar vein, Judge Alito took a constrained view of Congressional power in a 2000 case involving the Family and Medical Leave Act. He said the states were immune from lawsuits under the act. The Supreme Court came to the opposite conclusion in a different case in 2003.
Voting Rights
In his 1985 job application, Mr. Alito said that his interest in constitutional law was motivated by disagreement with some decisions of the Warren Court, among them those concerning reapportionment. The decisions, from the 1960's, required states to draw voting districts with equal populations. Some legal scholars at the time contended that the decisions did not have a basis in the Constitution.
Judge Bork, too, was critical of the decisions at his confirmation hearings. ''There is nothing in our history that suggests 'one man one vote' is the only proper way of apportioning,'' he said.
In November, after the disclosure of the 1985 job application, the White House said that Judge Alito now believes that one person one vote is ''bedrock principle.''
COURT IN TRANSITION: THE HEARINGS
	There is much common ground between many proponents and opponents of gay marriage. What matters, they say, is not whether the government may give gay couples who commit themselves to lasting partnerships the same bundle of benefits and burdens it gives straight couples who marry. What matters is the word used to describe the bundle.
''We have,'' wrote Justice Martha B. Sosman of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court in a dissent last week, ''a pitched battle over who gets to use the 'm' word.''
In that decision, the court made clear that, starting in May, gay couples can marry in the state. Proposed amendments to the state Constitution, assuming they clear several hurdles, may forbid such marriages starting in late 2006 and perhaps withdraw the m-word from any gay couples who were married in the interim. By then, some couples may have celebrated their second wedding anniversaries.
That ''retroactive demotion,'' in the words of Laurence H. Tribe, the Harvard law professor, could lead to numerous legal challenges. But those challenges, too, would largely be over symbols rather than substance.
''It's remarkable that the fallback position in Massachusetts is full legal rights by another name,'' said William B. Rubenstein, a law professor at the University of California, Los Angeles.
When the highest court in Massachusetts ruled that civil unions are an inadequate substitute for marriage, it also made clear that the rights associated with such unions are required under the state Constitution, though insufficient if not called marriage.
That means that unless a state constitutional amendment banned or limited civil unions -- and none of those under consideration do -- that aspect of the decision would stand. And the remaining argument would be about names.
Whether called a marriage or something else, Justice Sosman wrote, ''same-sex couples who are civilly 'united' will have literally every single right, privilege, benefit and obligation of every sort that our state law confers on opposite-sex couples who are civilly 'married.' ''
Gay rights advocates, and the majority in the 4-to-3 decision, said words are symbols and symbols matter.
''The dissimilitude between the terms 'civil marriage' and 'civil union' is not innocuous,'' Chief Justice Margaret H. Marshall wrote. ''It is a considered choice of language that reflects a demonstrable assigning of same-sex, largely homosexual, couples to second-class status.''
Lawyers for gay couples add that marriages are more likely to be recognized in other states than civil unions, though this argument is complicated by about 40 federal and state ''defense of marriage'' laws that say essentially the opposite.
Many defenders of heterosexual marriages stop short of objecting to civil unions. A proposed federal constitutional amendment introduced by Representative Marilyn Musgrave, Republican of Colorado, would reserve marriage and ''the legal incidents thereof'' to heterosexual couples and forbid the sanctioning of gay marriages. But a spokesman for Ms. Musgrave said the amendment would let states make their own decisions about civil unions.
Proposals for a compromise in Massachusetts that would take effect sooner than 2006 also make plain that the argument is in large part about nomenclature, not formal equality.
Justice Sosman proposed renaming all unions.
''Rather than imbuing the word 'marriage' with constitutional significance, there is much to be said for the argument that the secular legal institution, which has gradually come to mean something very different from its original religious counterpart, be given a name that distinguishes it from the religious sacrament of 'marriage,' '' she wrote. ''The legislature could, rationally and permissibly, decide that the time has come to jettison the term.''
The majority seemed to agree. A new name for all unions, Chief Justice Marshall wrote, ''might well be rational and permissible.''
Douglas W. Kmiec and Mark S. Scarberry, law professors at Pepperdine University, suggested in a recent column that Massachusetts could ''temporarily get out of the new marriage business entirely.'' This would treat gay and straight couples equally, though heterosexuals could still be married in other states, and would not require the state to withdraw marriage licenses from gay couples in 2006 if a constitutional amendment took effect.
''Massachusetts needs some time for cooler heads to prevail,'' Mr. Kmiec said in an interview. ''Legislators could say, 'We're going to close the civil marriage window in Massachusetts.' ''
Whatever happens in Massachusetts is unlikely to be required to be recognized elsewhere, legal experts said, though perhaps not for the most obvious reason. The various federal and state defense-of-marriage laws, they said, add little to existing constitutional principles and, if they do, may themselves be unconstitutional.
But the requirement that states acknowledge and enforce other states' public acts, records and judicial proceedings under the federal Constitution's ''full faith and credit'' clause is not absolute.
''No state has ever had an obligation to give credence to a judgment of another state that cuts deeply against the articulated public policy of the receiving state,'' Mr. Kmiec said. Laws that prohibit the recognition of gay marriages from other states are thus in one sense unconstitutional and in another an expression of the state's public policy.
Gay rights advocates say that, symbols aside, they would rather litigate cases about the recognition of marriage to those about civil unions.
''The concept of civil union exists in only one state,'' said Michael Adams, a lawyer with Lambda Legal. ''Couples who enter into civil unions in Vermont have had tremendous problems in getting any kind of recognition across state lines. We believe that gay and lesbian couples who are married stand on more solid ground in seeking recognition in other states.''
Mr. Rubenstein, who has written a treatise on sexual orientation and the law, had one prediction about the lawsuits that will follow the court decisions and legislation in Massachusetts. ''The only thing I can say for sure,'' he said, ''is that it's like a full employment act for lawyers.''
	Osbaldo Torres, a convicted murderer on death row in Oklahoma, should have been dead by now, his appeals exhausted, his time up.
But because 15 judges in The Hague, acting at the request of the government of Mexico, have forbidden his execution for now, he is alive in a cell in McAlester, awaiting the next move from the Netherlands.
Mr. Torres belongs to a subset of death-row inmates at the center of a struggle that has crossed national borders and raised combustible questions about the death penalty, due process, the reach of international law and the United States' standing in the court of world opinion.
He is one of 52 Mexican citizens in eight states whose convictions and death sentences are being challenged by Mexico in the International Court of Justice in The Hague. Mexico says the United States violated a treaty guaranteeing that foreigners arrested in this country have access to representatives of their government.
The court ordered the United States last February not to kill Mr. Torres and two compatriots, at least until it issues its final ruling, which is expected to come in the spring.
None of the 52 Mexicans have been put to death. In Mr. Torres's case, the Oklahoma attorney general asked a state appeals court in November to stay the execution ''out of courtesy'' to the international court. It was an unprecedented act of deference by an American official, legal experts said.
Mexico is seeking to void all 52 convictions and death sentences, contending that its citizens were denied the right to meet promptly with Mexican diplomats. The defendants should be retried, Mexico says, with statements obtained before such meetings excluded.
Mexico also asked the court to require that the United States honor these so-called consular rights in the future, perhaps by rewriting the standard Miranda warning given suspects before they are questioned by the police.
In its filings in The Hague, the United States, represented by lawyers from the State and Justice Departments, called Mexico's demands ''an unjustified, unwise and ultimately unacceptable intrusion into the United States criminal justice system.''
The acquiescence of the Oklahoma attorney general, Drew Edmondson, given after consultations with the State Department, is thus remarkable. It may reflect tactical prudence, as the international court is not likely to welcome being defied while the larger case is pending. Or it may indicate a desire by the United States to maintain a level of international comity, even as the war in Iraq and the widespread use of the death penalty in the United States have been criticized by some of its allies.
The United States' arguments before The Hague are not quite those of a global scofflaw. This country has, in fact, been a party to the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations since 1969, as well as to a separate protocol in which it submitted to the jurisdiction of the international court to interpret the convention and to resolve disputes about it. Treaties are, under the Constitution, ''the supreme law of the land.''
Although the United States does not view the rulings of many international bodies as binding, it does acknowledge the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice to decide cases brought under the consular relations convention and, in some circumstances, to order nations to comply with the court's interpretation of it. In the Mexican case, however, the United States contends that the court lacks jurisdiction to determine by ''highly specific means'' what nations must do to comply.
One hundred sixty-four other nations are also parties to the convention, and the United States invokes it often when its citizens are detained abroad.
''If you were arrested in Damascus and they gave you a dime,'' said Donald F. Donovan, a lawyer at Debevoise & Plimpton, which represents Mexico in the case, ''would you want to call your court-appointed lawyer or the American embassy?''
The convention requires that arrested foreigners be told of their right to speak with consular officials. If they do, local officials must contact the appropriate consulate. Both actions, the convention says, must be taken ''without delay.''
Mexico contends that these obligations are often ignored in the United States, and that Mexican officials frequently learn of arrests of Mexican citizens only years later, and only by happenstance. The two nations differ about how well Mexico, which does not have the death penalty, complies with the convention.
The Mexican government says it did not learn of the 1993 arrest of Mr. Torres, then 18, until 1996. Mr. Torres had lived in the United States since he was 5, prosecutors said.
By the time Mexico learned of the charges against Mr. Torres, from relatives, he had already been twice tried for the murder of a couple in front of their children. The first trial ended in a mistrial because the jury could not agree about whether he was guilty. The second ended with a death sentence.
When Mr. Torres's lawyers then tried to raise the Vienna Convention in his defense, courts said that the defendant was too late, and that he would not have benefited from Mexican assistance in any event.
Mexico disputes that.
''When consular protection is permitted to function,'' Victor Manuel Uribe Avina of the Mexican foreign affairs ministry told the Hague court last month, ''life sentences are the likely outcome.''
Mexico says it provides an important ''cultural bridge'' when its citizens become entangled in the American criminal justice system. Such defendants are often confused, distrustful, unable to speak English and baffled by American procedures, Mexican officials say. If notified, the Mexican government provides lawyers, translators and investigators. It also helps round up evidence in Mexico, which can be very valuable in the sentencing phase in capital cases.
There are 122 foreign citizens from 31 countries on death row in the United States, in 14 states and in the federal system, according to Human Rights Research, a consulting firm that assists lawyers and consulates in capital cases involving foreigners. Almost half are from Mexico.
The issue has been an ongoing source of tension between Mexico and the United States, and in January 2003 Mexico took its case to the international court. Three Mexicans have been executed since 2000. In all three cases, the Vienna Convention was violated, Mexico argues. In 2002, Vicente Fox, the Mexican president, canceled a trip to President Bush's ranch in Texas to protest the execution of one of the men, Javier Suarez Medina.
There is little dispute that the United States violated the treaty in most or all of the 52 cases before the court in The Hague. The core issue during several days of arguments before the court last month was what should follow from that.
Until not long ago, the government's official position was that an apology should suffice. After a decision of the international court in 2001 that violations require ''review and reconsideration,'' the United States has taken the position that it has complied with that ruling, in cases including Mr. Torres's, by encouraging governors to consider Vienna Convention claims as part of clemency proceedings.
''The United States says the only remedy a defendant is entitled to is an opportunity to beg for mercy,'' said Sandra L. Babcock, a Minneapolis lawyer and the director of the Mexican Capital Legal Assistance Program. ''But we're talking about a legal right. It requires a legal remedy.''
At The Hague last month and in legal filings, State Department lawyers described ''the very substantial efforts undertaken by the United States to comply with its obligations,'' including the circulation of 100,000 copies of a compliance manual and 600,000 pocket cards to local law enforcement officials. Still, they noted, there are 700,000 law enforcement officials in the United States in 18,000 separate state and local jurisdictions.
Catherine W. Brown, a State Department lawyer, told the international court last month that asking more of the United States was unreasonable. ''As a practical matter, a country the size of the United States would never have accepted an obligation that would have put the ordinary conduct of criminal investigations and public safety at jeopardy,'' Ms. Brown said.
A State Department spokeswoman declined to comment on Mr. Torres's pending execution in Oklahoma and those of two defendants in Texas that would presumably have taken place by now, but for the case in The Hague.
In March, the department's top lawyer acknowledged in a speech to state attorneys general that the pending executions were a matter of concern. ''We have had a number of conversations with government lawyers in both states about these cases,'' the lawyer, William Howard Taft IV, said. In November, Mr. Torres asked the United States Supreme Court to honor the international court's interim order staying his execution. The Supreme Court declined to hear the case. Justices John Paul Stevens and Stephen Breyer indicated that they would be inclined to consider it once the international court rendered its final judgment.
''The answer to Lord Ellenborough's famous rhetorical question, 'Can the Island of Tobago pass a law to bind the whole world?,' may well be yes,'' Justice Breyer mused, ''where the world has conferred such binding authority through treaty.''
Mr. Edmondson, the Oklahoma attorney general, effectively stopped the execution the same day the Supreme Court failed to act, and Mr. Torres remains in a sort of limbo, caught between two legal systems. Charlie Price, a spokesman for Mr. Edmondson, said that would continue until the 15 judges in the Netherlands ruled.
	The opinion is more than 50 years old, and it is not even binding precedent. But just minutes into the Supreme Court confirmation hearings of Judge Samuel A. Alito Jr., it took center stage and seemed to lay the groundwork for the questions he will face concerning his views on the limits of presidential power.
The 1952 opinion, a concurrence by Justice Robert H. Jackson, rejected President Harry S. Truman's assertion that he had the constitutional power to seize the nation's steel mills to aid the war effort in Korea. Whether and how Justice Jackson's analysis should apply to broadly similar recent assertions by the Bush administration, notably concerning its domestic surveillance program, will plainly be a central theme when questioning of Judge Alito begins Tuesday morning.
Senator Arlen Specter, the Republican chairman of the Judiciary Committee, discussed only three decisions by name in his opening statement: Justice Jackson's concurrence in the 1952 case, Youngstown Sheet and Tube Company v. Sawyer, and two abortion cases, Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey.
Quoting from the Jackson concurrence and referring to the surveillance program, Mr. Specter said, ''What is at stake is the equilibrium established by our constitutional system.''
Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the ranking Democrat on the committee, made a similar assertion in noting that Judge Alito would replace Justice Sandra Day O'Connor if he was confirmed. ''She upheld,'' Mr. Leahy said, ''the fundamental principle of judicial review over the exercise of government power.''
That was a reference to Justice O'Connor's decisive opinion turning back another broad assertion of executive power in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, a 2004 case in which the court allowed a man held without charges as an enemy combatant to challenge his detention, over the objections of the Bush administration.
''We have long since made clear that a state of war is not a blank check for the president when it comes to the rights of the nation's citizens,'' Justice O'Connor wrote for herself and three other justices in 2004. She cited one case as precedent for that proposition: Youngstown.
Judge Alito, in his brief, mostly biographical opening statement, did not address Youngstown or any other case. But he did seem to nod in the direction of the current controversy. ''No person in this country, no matter how high or powerful, is above the law,'' he said, ''and no person in this country is beneath the law.''
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., at his confirmation hearings in September, endorsed Justice Jackson's concurrence. It has, Judge Roberts said, ''set the framework for consideration of questions of executive power in times of war and with respect to foreign affairs since it was decided.''
Most of the discussion of executive power on Monday came from Democratic senators. One Republican, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, argued for an aggressive view of executive power.
''In a time of war,'' Mr. Graham said, ''I want the executive branch to have the tools to protect me, my family and my country.''
In 1952, the Supreme Court faced a set of clashing interests in the Youngstown case broadly similar to those in the current surveillance controversy. That April, President Truman seized the nation's steel mills to prevent an expected labor strike, saying that national security during the Korean War required uninterrupted access to steel.
In June 1952, in a 6-to-3 decision, the Supreme Court rejected the various legal rationales offered by the Truman administration for the seizures. Many of those rationales have echoes in the justifications offered by the Bush administration for its detention of enemy combatants, harsh interrogations and domestic surveillance without court approval.
Writing for the court, Justice Hugo L. Black said the president's power was extensive but not unlimited.
''Even though 'theater of war' be an expanding concept,'' Justice Black wrote, ''we cannot with faithfulness to our constitutional system hold that the commander in chief of the armed forces has the ultimate power as such to take possession of private property in order to keep labor disputes from stopping production. This is a job for the nation's lawmakers, not for its military authorities.''
There are, of course, obvious differences between the Youngstown case and recent efforts to combat terrorism. The seizure of the steel mills, for instance, was a wholly domestic matter. The surveillance program, by contrast, monitors international communications between the United States and other nations. The Korean War was, moreover, a conventional one, while terrorism involves a more amorphous threat.
It is not entirely clear why Justice Jackson's concurrence has had such a lasting impact. It may be because he spoke with particular authority, having argued for expansive executive power as President Franklin D. Roosevelt's attorney general, much as Judge Alito did when he was a lawyer in the Reagan administration.
''That comprehensive and undefined presidential powers hold both practical advantages and grave dangers for the country,'' Justice Jackson wrote in the concurrence, ''will impress anyone who has served as legal adviser to a president in time of transition and public anxiety.''
He proposed three categories to judge the constitutionality of assertions of executive power. His framework may be thought to endorse or reject the Bush administration's position, depending on how various Congressional actions are understood.
The president's authority is at its maximum, Justice Jackson wrote, when he ''acts pursuant to an express or implied authorization of Congress.'' The administration says a resolution authorizing the president to use military force after the Sept. 11 attacks was such authorization.
In his opening statement, Mr. Graham said he was troubled by that argument. ''I've got some problems,'' he said, ''with using a force resolution to the point that future presidents may not be able to get a force resolution from Congress if you interpret it too broadly.''
Justice Jackson's second category was ''a zone of twilight'' in which Congress has taken no action. In that case, he said, ''any actual test of power is likely to depend on the imperatives of events and contemporary imponderables rather than on abstract theories of law.''
The third category is where the president takes action at odds with the will of Congress. A 1978 law, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, appears to require court approval before monitoring of the sort the administration has acknowledged.
In this third area, Justice Jackson said, the president's power is ''at its lowest ebb,'' and claims of presidential authority ''must be scrutinized with caution.''
COURT IN TRANSITION: LEGAL CONTEXT
	Ali al-Marri, whom the government calls a sleeper agent for Al Qaeda and who is the only person on the American mainland still held as an enemy combatant, spends his days in a small cell in solitary confinement at the Navy brig in Charleston, S.C. When he is in an ironic mood, his lawyers say, he calls the cell his villa.
Mr. Marri waits there for word from his wife, two sons and three daughters, whom he last saw in 2001, just before his arrest in Peoria, Ill., where he was studying computer science at Bradley University.
Letters arrive, but they are late and have words and sentences blacked out. A note his wife sent to him 10 months ago landed recently. It began with a standard Muslim invocation, but a word was missing. Mr. Marri is pretty sure it was ''Allah.''
But mostly Mr. Marri waits for word from a federal appeals court, which will soon rule on one of the most urgent questions in American law, one his case presents in stark form: May the government indefinitely detain a foreigner living legally in the United States, without charges and without access to the courts?
Mr. Marri, who is 41 and a citizen of Qatar, wants the right to challenge President Bush's assertion that he is a terrorist and ''a grave danger to the national security of the United States.''
The Bush administration says the courts cannot second-guess the president when he decides that someone is an enemy combatant, at least when noncitizens are involved. Detaining combatants is a military rather than a criminal matter, the administration says, adding that its purpose is not to punish the prisoner but to stop him from returning to the battlefield.
The implications of that position are startling, according to a brief filed last month in Mr. Marri's case by some 30 constitutional scholars. ''The government's interpretation would be vastly threatening to the liberty of more than 20 million noncitizens residing in the United States,'' the brief said, ''exposing them to the risk of irremediable indefinite detention on the basis of unfounded rumors, mistaken identity, the desperation of other detainees subject to coercive interrogation, and the deliberate lies of actual terrorists.''
Kathleen M. Blomquist, a spokeswoman for the Justice Department, disputed that contention.
''Of all the terrorists currently in the custody of the United States military, al-Marri is the only one who was captured in the United States,'' Ms. Blomquist said, adding that the notion that millions of people are at risk is ''unfounded and absurd.''
Mr. Bush's determination that Mr. Marri is an enemy combatant, she said, was based on substantial evidence, including ''his association with Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, mastermind of the 9/11 attacks, and files found on his computer concerning chemical weapons of mass destruction.''
Mr. Marri maintains his innocence, his lawyers say. But they have refused to offer point-by-point rebuttals of the government's detailed assertions, calling instead for prosecutors to offer evidence to back them up in court.
''In a civilized society and under American law and tradition,'' said Jonathan Hafetz, a lawyer for Mr. Marri with the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University School of Law, ''the government has the obligation to prove its case.''
One of Mr. Marri's brothers, Mohammed Marri, in a telephone interview from Qatar, rejected the charge that Mr. Marri is a terrorist. ''For sure it's not true,'' he said.
A third brother, Jarallah, is at Guantnamo Bay, Cuba, held as an enemy combatant based on accusations that he had visited a Qaeda camp. ''This is not a proper way to treat other people from other countries,'' Mohammed Marri said of his brothers and other detainees. ''If they are guilty, let them prove it in court.''
An Exclusive Club
The Charleston brig can hold 288 military prisoners and 6 enemy combatants, but there have never been more than 3 in the exclusive enemy combatant club. Two of them are now gone.
One of them, Yaser Hamdi, was freed and sent to Saudi Arabia after the United States Supreme Court allowed him to challenge his detention in 2004. Jose Padilla was transferred to the criminal justice system last year just as the Supreme Court was considering whether to review his case. That leaves only Mr. Marri.
Mr. Hamdi and Mr. Padilla are American citizens, but Mr. Marri is not. They were seized abroad or on their way back to the United States, while Mr. Marri was living what seemed to be an ordinary life, in Peoria, a city often caricatured as the nation's most ordinary, with a family and a minivan.
The government contends in a partly declassified declaration from a senior defense intelligence official, Jeffrey N. Rapp, and in a recent book by former Attorney General John Ashcroft, that Mr. Marri was a Qaeda sleeper agent sent to the United States to commit mass murder and disrupt the banking system.
The assertions have not been tested in court, and human rights groups say they are based on unreliable evidence ''There is substantial reason to believe,'' lawyers for two of the groups wrote in a brief in November, ''that the allegations of the Rapp declaration are derived from the torture of two men interrogated at Guantnamo Bay and other detention sites: Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and Mustafa Ahmed al-Hawsawi.''
The government says that Mr. Hawsawi was one of the financiers of the Sept. 11 attacks.
Mr. Rapp's declaration cites the personal views of Mr. Mohammed, who is often referred to as K.S.M. ''K.S.M. considered al-Marri an ideal sleeper agent,'' Mr. Rapp wrote.
Kept in Isolation
Mr. Marri was kept in isolation at the brig and, according to his court filings, subjected to tough interrogation. Interrogators threatened to send him to Egypt or Saudi Arabia, according to a lawsuit filed on his behalf in 2005, ''where, they told him, he would be tortured and sodomized and where his wife would be raped in front on him.''
''By winter '05,'' Andrew J. Savage, who also represents Mr. Marri, said in a recent interview, ''I genuinely thought he was losing his mind. He told me in this sort of indirect way that he might not be able to hold on, that his mind was playing tricks on him.''
Mr. Padilla's lawyers have said that their client's time in the brig was so grueling that he is not fit to stand trial. But while Mr. Padilla was passive, Mr. Marri pushed back. He put wet toilet paper on the video camera, for instance. The brig responded by taking away his mattress, Koran and hygienic products, including his toilet paper.
''There is almost nothing to distract him from his torment,'' his lawyers wrote in the lawsuit, ''and he therefore becomes preoccupied with his pain and the degradation he suffers.''
Perhaps as a consequence of the lawsuit, conditions have improved.
When Mr. Marri's lawyers were first allowed to see him in October 2004, after the decision in Mr. Hamdi's case, Mr. Marri was behind a transparent barrier and bound in leg-irons and handcuffs that were linked to a belly-chain and fastened to the floor. Officials from the Defense Intelligence Agency and the brig were present, and the conversation was videotaped.
On a recent visit, Mr. Savage said, he met his client in a visiting lounge. Mr. Marri, who was not restrained, was wearing stylish bifocals rather than institutional prison glasses. He was also wearing a watch, which makes it easier for him to know when to pray.
Mr. Savage brought hummus and pita bread. ''We sat down, we broke bread, and we had a three-and-a-half hour conversation, unmonitored,'' Mr. Savage said.
Mr. Marri is now allowed to watch television in the evening, but not the news. He reads newspapers and magazines, but they are edited. ''Brig staff remove all materials associated with the war on terror from them,'' Cmdr. Stephanie L. Wright, the brig's commanding officer, said in court filing in July.
Sometimes that makes for a thin newspaper. ''All I get is sports and obits,'' Mr. Marri has complained, Mr. Savage said. He is critical of the former, saying there is not enough soccer coverage.
The Defense Department has allowed journalists and others to tour the Guantnamo facility, where Mr. Marri's brother Jarallah and 400 other men are being held. All of the Guantnamo prisoners are foreigners who were seized abroad. The government has not asserted that the brothers were working together.
The Defense Department refused a recent request to inspect the Charleston brig. A spokesman, Cmdr. J. D. Gordon, cited ''operational security concerns surrounding the detention of an alleged al Qaeda-linked operative in the U.S. mainland,'' a reference to Mr. Marri. Commander Gordon added that ''it has always been our policy to treat all detainees humanely.''
Return to the United States
Mr. Marri spent eight years in the United States as a young man, graduating from Bradley with an undergraduate degree in business administration in 1991. When he returned to the United States 10 years later, he brought his family.
In his declaration, Mr. Rapp noted that Mr. Marri's profile ''differed significantly from that of the Sept. 11, 2001, hijackers.'' Those differences, Mr. Rapp said, made Mr. Marri all the more attractive to Al Qaeda.
The years between Mr. Marri's two stints at Bradley are a mystery. The government says he trained at a Qaeda camp in Afghanistan for about a year and a half between 1996 and 1998, specializing in poisons. The government also says that Mr. Marri visited the United States briefly in 2000, which Mr. Marri has denied.
In the summer of 2001, Mr. Rapp wrote, Mr. Mohammed introduced Mr. Marri to Osama bin Laden. Mr. Marri ''offered to be an Al Qaeda martyr,'' Mr. Rapp wrote.
''Al Qaeda instructed al-Marri that it was imperative that he arrive in the United States prior to Sept. 11, 2001, and that if al-Marri could not do so, that he should cancel all his plans and go to Pakistan,'' Mr. Rapp wrote.
The Marris arrived in Peoria on Sept. 10, 2001.
Mr. Marri soon came to the attention of the F.B.I., which first interviewed him less than a month later. In December, agents searched his laptop, finding ''research consistent with the tradecraft and teachings associated with Al Qaeda,'' Mr. Rapp wrote. Mr. Marri was arrested on Dec. 12, 2001, and held as a material witness at the request of prosecutors in New York. He was indicted two months later on charges of credit card fraud. In January 2003, the government added charges of lying to federal agents and financial institutions, and identity theft. Mr. Marri pleaded not guilty. His family has since returned to the Middle East.
For a year and a half, the government pursued a conventional criminal case. Mr. Ashcroft, in his book ''Never Again,'' which was published in October, wrote that Mr. Marri ''rejected numerous offers to improve his lot'' by cooperating with investigators. ''He insisted,'' Mr. Ashcroft wrote, ''on becoming a 'hard case.' ''
In June 2003, as the case was nearing trial, the government abruptly changed course, taking Mr. Marri out of the criminal system and moving him into indefinite military detention. That means, Mr. Ashcroft later wrote, that Mr. Marri can be held ''at least until the war against Al Qaeda was over.''
In its rush to move Mr. Marri, the government short-circuited its criminal case. On hearing that a federal judge in Peoria would allow Mr. Marri's lawyers to file papers opposing the transfer as long as the criminal case was alive, the government agreed to dismiss the criminal charges with prejudice, meaning they cannot be refiled.
The decision, however, would not prevent the government from charging Mr. Marri with other crimes outlined in Mr. Rapp's declaration.
The declaration has served the purpose for which it was designed. In August, it persuaded Henry F. Floyd, a federal judge in Spartanburg, S.C., to deny a habeas corpus petition challenging Mr. Marri's detention. Saying that Mr. Marri had ''offered nothing more than a general denial'' of the assertions in the declaration, Judge Floyd dismissed the petition.
Neither side was happy with the ruling. Mr. Marri has appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Richmond, saying that the president does not have the power to detain him as an enemy combatant.
A foreigner living legally in the United States, his lawyers say, is not the same as a soldier captured on a battlefield. Even if the president does have the power, they say, he should be required to support his assertions with evidence.
The government argues that Judge Floyd gave Mr. Marri too full a hearing. It cited the recent Military Commissions Act, which says that the courts have no jurisdiction to hear challenges from any alien ''who has been determined by the United States to have been properly detained as an enemy combatant.''
The case will be heard Feb. 1
The government offered Mr. Marri a sort of consolation prize should the appeals court dismiss his case. It said he could try to persuade a combatant status review tribunal, convened by the Defense Department, that he was not an enemy combatant. That would apparently be the first such proceeding on the mainland; all of the others known to have been conducted were at Guantnamo Bay.
A Different View
In a brief filed in November, eight former Justice Department officials, including Janet Reno, the attorney general in the Clinton administration, said that taking Mr. Marri out of the criminal system as his case approached trial ''has given to the appearance of manipulation of the judicial process.'' The brief listed several criminal statutes available to prosecute people accused of terrorism along with many successful prosecutions under them.
''The criminal justice system has proven that it can make the cases,'' Ms. Reno said in an interview. ''For the president to be able to designate someone as an enemy combatant, without process and without regulation, just doesn't make any sense and isn't necessary.''
Ms. Blomquist, the Justice Department spokeswoman, said, ''While we respect the views of former law enforcement officials, the United States cannot afford to retreat to a pre-September 11 mind-set that treats terrorism solely as a domestic law enforcement problem.''
Mr. Marri shared a fantasy with one of his lawyers not long ago. ''I'd love to be taken back to Saudi Arabia and they would beat the'' -- here, he swore -- ''out of me for six months,'' Mr. Marri said, according to Mr. Savage. ''It would be brutal, but it would be finite.''
	