It was an affair that could not last. One year after France's leftist intelligentsia and conservative government joined forces to oppose war in Iraq, the love fest has ended in fresh talk of war. Now some 40,000 members of the educated elite have signed a petition that accuses the government of waging ''war on intelligence'' -- brain power, that is, not spying.
Underneath the polemics, as usual, lie money and politics. The protesters say that President Jacques Chirac's government has been trimming cultural, educational and scientific budgets to the detriment of the country's ''intelligence.'' While the government has a solid majority in parliament and the Socialist opposition is in disarray, the intellectuals are using next month's nationwide regional elections to get attention.
The squabble captured the spotlight at the awards ceremony for the Césars, the French Oscars, last Saturday. The actress and director Agnès Jaoui (''The Taste of Others'') led a verbal attack on Culture Minister Jean-Jacques Aillagon, accusing him of sponsoring ''absurd laws to eliminate the cultural exception.'' ''Cultural exception'' is used here to describe government support for French culture and protection of it.
Mr. Aillagon sat through the bombardment in uncomfortable silence, but he responded a few days later in a front-page article in Le Monde. ''What overwhelming conceit, this pretension to claim a monopoly over the defense of intelligence,'' he wrote of the petition's signers. And he added, ''The worst thing that intellectuals in this country can do is to enclose themselves in an immobilism and protectionism that will end up swallowing them.''
Patrick Devedjian, a junior government minister, was even more outspoken. ''In this country the intellectuals have a habit of signing petitions while in the United States they have Nobel Prizes,'' he told a radio station. ''Being an intellectual should not be considered a protected species. Being an intellectual includes demands, and results are often expected.''
Mr. Devedjian's remarks were considered inflammatory enough to merit opposition protests in Parliament, not least because many Socialist and Communist deputies, including a former Socialist prime minister, Michel Rocard, were among the petition's supporters.
The feud is rooted in a protest movement that sabotaged scores of arts festivals here last summer and then bubbled on through the winter, with the government refusing to restore cuts in unemployment benefits for self-employed actors and technicians. Now that dispute has become the spearhead of a much broader movement embracing teachers, scientists, psychiatrists, archaeologists, doctors, even lawyers.
All that they have in common, it seems, is a gripe against the government, usually over budget cuts, in some cases over recent law reforms: lawyers argue that increased police powers threaten human rights; psychotherapists are unhappy over a new bill requiring them to be formally qualified; archaeologists say the government has weakened their authority to supervise construction projects; and scientists complain that 550 postgraduate research jobs have been cut.
Thanks to the appeal against war on intelligence, made last week by Les Inrockuptibles, a rock and general-interest magazine modeled after Rolling Stone, these diverse sectors closed ranks. Thus the petition's signers include not only familiar faces like the philosopher Jacques Derrida, the movie directors Bertrand Tavernier and Claude Lanzmann, the theater directors Patrice Chereau and Ariane Mnouchkine and the former culture minister, Jack Lang, but also thousands of unknown intellectuals and professionals.
''All these sectors of learning, research, thought, social ties, producers of knowledge and public debate are today the target of massive attacks, evidence of a new government anti-intellectualism,'' said the petition, which was widely circulated by e-mail.
In the middle of this week, Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin stepped in to soothe tempers, saying he would have increased cultural subsidies if he had inherited a stronger economy from the Socialists two years ago. But he promised to work for solutions, then added a postscript: ''In your commentaries about Mr. Aillagon's presence at the Césars ceremony, you omitted one word: courage.''
Where this will lead is unclear, although the regional elections here on March 21 and 28 should help define the relative strengths of government and opposition. After that, if the past is any guide, the government and its vocal new foes will probably sit down and negotiate a truce. Despite the harsh words, they will continue to need each other.
	Of all the insurgent groups active in Latin America over the last half-century, none fitted the description of ''terrorist'' more aptly than Peru's Sendero Luminoso, or Shining Path. It began armed action in 1980, committed atrocities for more than a decade and was defeated under a president who was driven from office in 2000 for abuse of power.
So does Peru's war on terror offer any lessons to the United States?
The American directors of two documentaries being shown at Film Forum in New York this month believe it does: at the very least, they say, the Peruvian experience is a cautionary tale because of the price paid by Peru's fragile democracy in crushing terrorism.
Both directors, Pamela Yates and Ellen Perry, said they made their films with American audiences in mind. And while neither film explicitly draws parallels with the American war on terror, the issues raised in Peru -- from antiterrorist tactics to civil liberties -- have a familiar ring.
That said, the two documentaries are strikingly different.
''State of Fear: The Truth About Terrorism,'' directed by Ms. Yates, which opens Wednesday for a week, follows up on the work of Peru's Truth Commission, which concluded that more than 69,000 people were killed in terrorist or government-sponsored violence in Peru between 1980 and 2000. It also underlines how the war on terror was used to justify erosion of the country's democracy.
''The Fall of Fujimori,'' directed by Ms. Perry, which runs for two weeks starting Jan. 18, goes over some of the same ground, but much of it is based on interviews with Alberto Fujimori, Peru's president from 1990 to 2000, who is allowed to explain his strategy and claim credit for wiping out the Shining Path.
Peru's story, though, is not over.
From his exile in Japan, the land of his forefathers, Mr. Fujimori had long vowed to run again for office in April's presidential elections. As a step in this direction, in early November he flew to Chile, where he was arrested at the request of Peruvian authorities. Last week, Peru asked for his extradition to face an array of charges, from corruption to responsibility for death squads.
The two documentaries are contributing to Peru's re-examination of its recent past. ''State of Fear,'' applauded by human rights groups at a festival in Lima in August, is now being broadcast weekly by Peru's government-owned Channel 7 as a way of reminding people of Mr. Fujimori's excesses. ''The Fall of Fujimori'' was in turn welcomed by Mr. Fujimori's followers at the same festival.
What most distinguishes Peru's experience from the American war on terror is that Peru's violence was entirely homegrown. Founded by Abimael Guzmán, a former philosophy professor, the Shining Path promised to reverse centuries of injustice suffered by Peru's Indian population. But to assert its power, it created a reign of terror, notably in the Ayacucho region of the Andes.
In preparing ''State of Fear,'' Ms. Yates and her producer, Paco de Onis, attended public hearings of the Truth Commission. They returned to Peru to interview witnesses and, in some cases, accompanied them to the sites of Shining Path atrocities. Some in the movie, for instance, were press-ganged into the Shining Path as children and some were forced to kill their own families.
By the mid-1980's, Peru's armed forces were fighting the Shining Path in the Andes but, as ''State of Fear'' demonstrates, the result often increased the violence, with many Indian communities threatened and punished by both armed groups. And, in practice, military repression helped the Shining Path: by 1990, it was beginning to threaten the coastal capital of Lima.
It was then that Mr. Fujimori, another former professor, was elected. In April 1992, in the name of fighting terrorism, he closed Congress and assumed dictatorial powers. Five months later, Mr. Guzmán, the Shining Path's leader, was arrested. But a central argument in ''State of Fear'' is that the arrest came about, not through military repression, but through old-fashioned police work.
While Mr. Guzmán's arrest proved fatal to the Shining Path, Peru's military intelligence, under Vladimiro Montesinos, stepped up persecution of suspected terrorists, using torture and death squads. In ''State of Fear,'' a woman called Magdalena Monteza described how, on her first day at university, she was arrested, repeatedly raped and then jailed. Sitting beside her in the interview was the young girl born of that rape.
In ''The Fall of Fujimori,'' Mr. Fujimori points out that he was overwhelmingly re-elected for a second term in 1995. ''What were Peruvians willing to do in the name of peace?'' Ms. Perry wondered in a telephone interview from Los Angeles. ''They allowed military tribunals, they allowed death squads, they knew this was going on.'' And, she added: ''I'm perplexed that they're going after him on pre-1995 charges when his re-election was a landslide.''
What eventually undermined Mr. Fujimori was his decision to seek re-election again in 2000. And despite protests that he violated the constitution, he won. Then, shortly after his inauguration, a television channel broadcast a videotape showing Mr. Montesinos bribing a congressman. Within 10 days, Mr. Montesinos had fled the country and, as more videotapes were shown, Mr. Fujimori's regime began to unravel.
He called for new elections and distanced himself from Mr. Montesinos. But in November 2000, as evidence of Mr. Montesinos's corruption mounted, Mr. Fujimori flew to Japan and faxed his resignation as president. In ''The Fall of Fujimori,'' he says that his life was in danger and insists that he knew nothing of Mr. Montesinos's illegal activities.
''Montesinos in my mind is a criminal and a rebel,'' Ms. Perry said. ''Fujimori is a patriot, a rebel and possibly a criminal. Fujimori and Montesinos are truly Shakespearean characters.''
Certainly, her film focuses more on its main character than on his record. ''It gives you a glimpse into the mind of a dictator,'' said Ms. Perry, who has been nominated for a Writers Guild Documentary Screenplay Award along with her co-writers, Zack Anderson and Kim Roberts. ''I don't spend 20 minutes talking about the brutality of the military, but it's all in there subtly.''
In contrast, ''State of Fear'' offers a more comprehensive view of Peru's battle against terrorism and for democracy. It is also having an unexpected international impact. In July, it was broadcast in 45 languages on the National Geographic Channels International. And last month, it provoked a fierce debate between critics and supporters of the Russian government at a human rights festival in Moscow.
''They're working on a Quechua version,'' Mr. de Onis said, referring to one of Peru's Indian languages. ''We showed it at a festival in Nepal in September and pro-democracy groups there now want a Nepalese version. We're thinking of doing an Arabic version. They're looking at the film in Northern Ireland. It's amazing to see the film take on a life of its own.
Ms. Yates added: ''I hope the film helps our own debate on the best way to defeat terrorism.''
	