That incandescent intellect, the Stephen Hawking of jurisprudence, has been kind enough to take time from his busy schedule to explain to us how the Republic really works.
Antonin Scalia has devoted 21 pages to illuminating the impertinence of those who suggest that it is wrong for a Supreme Court justice to take favors from a friend with a case before the court.
Res ipsa loquitur, baby. Why should the justice who put Dick Cheney in the White House stop helping him now? It's the logrolling, stupid!
''Many justices have reached this court precisely because they were friends of the incumbent president or other senior officials,'' the justice sniffs.
That elite old boy network can really help in those dicey moments when you need to stop the wrong sort, like Al Gore, from getting ahead.
You don't stop ingratiating yourself with your powerful friends and accepting ''social courtesies'' from them just because you get on the court. Ingratitude is a terrible vice.
Anyway, what's the point of being in the ultimate insiders' club if you have to fly coach, eat at IHOP and follow silly rules on conflict of interest?
Justice Scalia proffers that while he accepted the vice president's offer of a ride on Air Force Two to Louisiana for a duck hunting trip, taking along his son and son-in-law, there was no quid pro quack. ''I never hunted in the same blind as the vice president,'' he says. No need for justice to be blind when the blinds are just.
Not since Tony Soprano discovered ducks in his swimming pool have ducks revealed so much about the man.
The justice elucidates that if he and his family had not accepted a free ride on Air Force Two, there would have been ''considerable inconvenience'' to his other friends, who would have had to meet a commercial plane in New Orleans and arrange car and boat trips to the hunting camp.
What is integrity compared to inconvenience?
''I daresay that, at a hypothetical charity auction, much more would be bid for dinner for two at the White House than for a one-way flight to Louisiana on the vice president's jet,'' he writes wittily. ''Justices accept the former with regularity.'' Now there's an argument that requires a first-rate mind: Everybody does it.
Only a few casuistical steps away from parsing the meaning of ''is,'' Justice Scalia writes that it is fine for him to be friends with Mr. Cheney and hear his case as long as it doesn't concern ''the personal fortune or the personal freedom of the friend.''
Holy Halliburton, whatever were we thinking?
The Sierra Club suit is against Mr. Cheney in his official capacity, not in his camouflage capacity.
''Political consequences are not my concern,'' says the justice. Unless, of course, it's about picking the president of the United States.
He reassures us that ''Washington officials know the rules, and know that discussing with judges pending cases -- their own or anyone else's -- is forbidden.'' We must simply trust them, for they were bred to lead. Watching Mr. Cheney and Justice Scalia in action is all the proof one needs that Washington officials would never break the rules or engage in cronyism.
''If it is reasonable to think that a Supreme Court justice can be bought so cheap, the nation is in deeper trouble than I had imagined,'' the justice scoffs.
That's for sure.
Justice Scalia says, ''The people must have confidence in the integrity of the justices, and that cannot exist in a system that assumes them to be corruptible by the slightest friendship or favor, in an atmosphere where the press will be eager to find foot-faults.'' He observes that it would be nonsensical for him to recuse himself simply because the press has the effrontery to point out when someone has done something wrong.
We, the press, are supposed to be the handmaidens and the manservants of our rulers. If we fulfilled our duties properly, our reports would go something like this:
In an admirable spirit of uncommon objectivity, in the pursuit of truth, justice and the American way, Associate Justice Scalia made time to poke around in the marshes of Louisiana with the equally scrupulous Dick Cheney, and then, refreshed by a well-deserved plane trip at our expense, he continued to transmit his enlightenment to a grateful nation.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com
	It was a scene that Mary McCarthy could have written the devil out of: a funeral for a fine, bland fellow that filled everybody with unfine, unbland thoughts. The formal serenity of the service, disguised, but only barely, the virulent rivalries and envies and grudges and grievances that have roiled this group for many decades.
None of the eulogists noted the irony that the man who ushered out one long national nightmare had ushered in another, the one we're living in now. It was Gerald Ford, after all, who gave America the gift of Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld -- the gift that keeps on taking.
The two former Ford administration officials, who doomed Iraq to civil war and despoiled American values, were honorary pallbearers yesterday, as was that other slippery and solipsistic courtier, Henry Kissinger.
The group was even more on edge because of a remarkable trellis of peppery opinions that had tumbled out of the man in the coffin, posthumously. The late president, hailed as the most understated and decent guy in the world, had given a series of interviews on the condition that they be held until his death -- a belated but bracing smackdown of many of his distinguished mourners.
It was impossible not to wonder what the luminaries were truly thinking, as they sat listening to fugues of Bach and Brahms and encomiums to the ordinary-guy leader.
Nancy Reagan's imperturbable expression behind her big sunglasses did not disguise the gloating words visible in the bubble over her head: ''And they call this a funeral?''
It could not compare, of course, to the incredible Princess of Wales treatment that her husband had for his state funeral. And Nancy, hypersensitive to any slights to her Ronnie, would not have been pleased with Mr. Ford's interview with Michael Beschloss published in Newsweek, in which he blamed Ronald Reagan for costing him the 1976 election by challenging his nomination and then failing to hit the trail for him.
It was good of Mr. Ford to bring 41 and 43 together in a solemn respite from their uneasy competition over Iraq.
''Told you so, you sons of guns -- we were right to stop at Safwan and stay out of Baghdad,'' the father's bubble read, as he watched Rummy and Henry the K, both of whom had treated Poppy with such veiled contempt, as though he were a feather duster. ''Those vicious Moktada-loving Shiites dancing around Saddam's dead body prove that Brent and I were right.''
Lynne Cheney glared at Poppy as he gave his eulogy, knowing that he privately thinks that the vice president has destroyed not only Iraq and American foreign policy, but the Bush family name. Her storm cloud of a bubble is expurgated.
Hillary's bubble was full of mockery for another New Yorker in the National Cathedral: ''You think you're so smart, Rudy, but you leave your entire presidential battle plan in a hotel room for your rivals to find? The victim role doesn't suit you.'' Condi's bubble was as opaquely dark as Hillary's was risibly light -- drooping with the inchoate fear that her nearby erstwhile mentor, Brent Scowcroft, had been right about Iraq after all.
As Poppy spoke from the altar, praising Mr. Ford's generosity, he must have been mulling that his predecessor was ungenerous in spitting on him from the grave. Mr. Ford told Mr. Beschloss that Bush Senior had sold out the party to the hard right and had taken a phony, pandering position on abortion.
Poppy had to have enjoyed watching Dr. K get up and lavish praise on his old boss, after Mr. Ford had sniggered to Bob Woodward that the ''coy'' Bavarian diva had ''the thinnest skin of any public figure I ever knew.''
W. graciously walked Betty Ford down the aisle, even as he must have curdled inside about her husband's telling Mr. Woodward that it had been ''a big mistake'' on the part of W., Dick Cheney and Rummy to justify the Iraq war with nonexistent W.M.D. ''I just don't think we should go hellfire damnation around the globe freeing people, unless it is directly related to our own national security,'' he said.
Ex-presidents weren't supposed to criticize sitting presidents. Adding insult to injury, Woodward himself was in the cathedral. How did he manage to get all these deathbed confessions, W. had to wonder. ''Jeez,'' his bubble read, ''does he have an interview with my old man in the can?''
Rummy's pop-up was as cocky as ever: ''Golly, I've been gone three weeks and things are really looking up in Iraq.''
James Baker's secret thoughts belied his poker face: ''I tried to help you out, son, but you're too dang stubborn. Or 'resolute,' as you say. Stubolute. A clear case of TMC -- too much Cheney.''
Dick Cheney's bubble was trouble: ''I'm surging, I'm surging, I'm surging.''
Op-Ed Columnist
	The day we mourned a man whose life was devoted to clarity, this city was hidden in fog. You couldn't see the Potomac, even on its bank.
There were many things to love about David Rosenbaum. He had a grin that always improved the weather. He was uncommonly generous to reporters he worked with and competed against. He was an exemplary husband, father, brother, uncle and grandfather.
But the truly astonishing thing about David, the Times reporter who was killed in a random robbery a week ago, was his unglamorous, unsanctimonious, unvain sort of goodness. He had a black-and-white sense of honor that was oddly old-fashioned in a capital slimed by lies, bribery, greed, corruption and ends-justify-the-means malarkey.
The skells, as Detective Sipowicz would say, saw David walking in his neighborhood after dinner and whacked him in the head with a pipe. One low-life bought laundry detergent, gas and tires with David's credit card while he lay dying.
Our friend David Shribman, the executive editor of The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, wrote in The St. Petersburg Times, where David Rosenbaum started: ''A thoughtful man struck down by the ultimate act of thoughtlessness. A man who taught others when to use 'that' and when to use 'which' only to be felled by that over which he had no control.''
Despite George Washington and the cherry tree, we no longer have a society especially consecrated to truth. The culture produces an infinity of TV shows and movies depicting the importance of honesty. But they're really talking only about the importance of being honest about your feelings. Sharing feelings is not the same thing as telling the truth. We've become a country of situationalists.
Journalism, politics and publishing have been tarred by scandals that have revealed a chilling insensitivity to right and wrong. Random House isn't concerned that an author makes up stuff in a book labeled nonfiction; it just kept counting the money after The Smoking Gun exposed James Frey's lies about his own life.
When Mr. Frey went on ''Larry King Live'' with his mom to defend his book's ''essential truths,'' Oprah Winfrey called in to back him up. She sounded disturbingly like Scott McClellan. Despite doubts about facts in the book, she said, ''the underlying message of redemption'' still ''resonates'' with her. She should have said: ''Had I known that many parts were fake, I wouldn't have recommended the book to millions of loyal viewers. I wouldn't have made this liar a lot of money.'' She should take a page from Stephen Colbert and put the slippery Frey on her ''Dead to me'' list.
For David Rosenbaum, just retired at 63 but still full of enthusiasms, there was a right way and a wrong way, and he possessed a natural knowledge of which was which.
''My father taught me the importance of always doing the right thing, always, even when it didn't really matter,'' his daughter, Dottie, said at the memorial service yesterday in a committee room at the Senate, David's old beat. ''At my 12th birthday party, my parents took me and a bunch of friends to see a movie, and they counted up how many of us were already 12 so that they could pay the adult fare.  even though none of us carried ID, and we all looked like total pipsqueaks.''
As his pal Robin Toner put it, David thought that behind every arcane tax provision and appropriations bill, ''there were real people, getting something or having something taken away by their government.'' You had to keep digging and arguing to find the truth in the fog. Even when he was smothered by conventional wisdom, Robin recalled, ''David's voice would break out: 'I disagree!' ''
He was practicing a lost art. Tough questioning now has no place in polite society. It's the wimpification of debate. Martha-Ann Alito cries, and the Democrats back off from examining why Samuel Alito was so opportunistic about his bigoted alumni club and whether he will curb women's rights for generations.
W. mau-maus the Democrats and the press on his administration's Freyish blurring of fact and fiction on Iraq, trying to stifle any debate over the phony genesis of the war as bad for morale. What's truly bad for our morale is when the president suggests it's dishonest to have an honest debate about the Bush cabal's dishonesty.
If only someone had said, ''I disagree!'' in W.'s presence long ago, on pre-emptive war, on kidnapping and torture, on illegal eavesdropping.
David's tortoise-shell reading glasses are still hanging on his computer. That scrupulous gaze will be missed.
Op-Ed Columnist
	