Doing the math, you've got to figure that the 12 wise men and one wise woman had about 30 seconds apiece to say their piece to the president about Iraq, where vicious assaults this week have killed almost 200 and raised U.S. troop fatalities to at least 2,189.
It must have been like a performance by the Reduced Shakespeare Company, which boils down the great plays and books to their essence. Proust is ''I like cookies.'' Othello raps that he left Desdemona ''all alona, didn't telephona.'' ''The Iliad'' and ''The Odyssey'' condense into ''The Idiodity.'' ''Henry V'' is ''A king's gotta do what a king's gotta do,'' and ''Antony and Cleopatra'' is ''Never get involved in Middle Eastern affairs.''
Beyond taking a class picture spaced around Mr. Bush's bizarrely empty desk -- a mesmerizing blend of ''Sunset Boulevard,'' ''The Last Supper'' and a ''Sopranos'' ad -- the former secretaries of state and defense had to make the most of their brief colloquy with W.
The spectral Robert McNamara might have enlightened Mr. Bush on Vietnam: ''Didn't understand the culture. Misjudged the opposition. Didn't know when to get out.'' If he was a fast talker, he could have added: ''It's the dominoes. If Iraq falls, then Syria falls, then Lebanon falls, and before you know it, all of Southeast Asia -- I mean, the Middle East -- will fall.''
Melvin Laird only needed to add: ''Ditto.''
Al Haig's summation would have been a cinch: ''I resign. I'm in charge here. I resign -- again.''
Instead of maintaining his good-soldier silence, Colin Powell could have redeemed himself with four words: ''I should have resigned.''
Madeleine Albright might have succinctly imparted some wisdom from Somalia and Rwanda: ''Didn't understand the culture. Misjudged the threat. Didn't know when to get in.''
James Baker, Svengali and Sphinx, must have been thinking: ''I told your dad not to let you in here. I could tell you how to get out of Iraq in 10 minutes, but you're too under the sway of that nutball Cheney to listen.''
George Shultz only needed to say: ''I have a tiger tattooed on my fanny,'' and Lawrence Eagleburger could have abridged his thoughts to ''I need a smoke -- bad.''
It may seem disturbing at first that with several hundreds of years' worth of foreign policy at his elbows, and a bloody, thorny mess in Iraq, Mr. Bush would devote mere moments to letting some fresh air into his House of Pain.
Sure, he has A.D.D. But he just spent six straight days mountain-biking and clearing brush in Crawford. He couldn't devote 60 minutes to getting our kids home, rather than just a few for a ''Message: I Care'' photo-op faking sincerity?
''We all went into the bubble and came out,'' one of the wise men noted.
Mr. Eagleburger explained their role as props, saying it was hard to volubly express yourself with a president. ''There was some criticism, but it was basically 'You haven't talked to the American people enough.' '' Lighting a cigarette on the way out -- he'd thrown one in the bushes on the way in -- he added a world-weary coda: ''We're all has-beens anyway.''
Mr. Eagleburger knows the truth. If W. had wanted to really reach out, rather than just pretend to reach out so his poll numbers would go up, he would have sought advice outside his warped inner circle long ago -- including from his own father.
Because W.'s mind is so closed to anybody except yes-men who tell him his policies and wars are slam-dunks, uneasy seasoned mandarins are forced to make a noisy stink. Brent Scowcroft, one of Bush Senior's closest friends, had to resort to the pages of The New Yorker to voice his objections. He ominously said Dick Cheney, his old colleague, was someone he no longer recognized.
You wonder whether the other contemporaries of Cheney and Rummy from Ford, Reagan and Bush I days were thinking the same thing at Thursday's meeting: Why have these guys gone so kooky?
W. is drunk on Cheney Kool-Aid. So he got testy when Ms. Albright pointed out that North Korea and Iran were going nuclear while the U.S. was bogged down in Baghdad. Then, after a quick photo in the Oval, he shooed the old-timers out, letting anyone who wanted to stay talk to the security factotum Stephen Hadley.
Still busy spreading fog over the war, W., Cheney, Rummy and Condi had no time to hear Mr. McNamara expound on the fog of war. In the picture, as Ms. Albright cringes, Mr. McNamara looks haunted, unable to escape second-guessing over Vietnam.
The only thing that would have made the photo even more utterly phony than it was would have been the presence of that vintage warmonger, Henry the K.
Op-Ed Columnist
	Maybe I've had Dick Cheney wrong all along.
Maybe he's not maniacally secretive, manipulative with the truth and contemptuous of democratic institutions. Perhaps he's cruelly misunderstood in his heartfelt desire to disseminate information.
It was at the end of his interview with Brit Hume, when Shooter talked about Scooter, that his eagerness to share important facts with the press and public -- a well-concealed trait in recent days, years and decades -- burst forth. He pronounced himself a Great Declassifier.
Asked by the Fox News anchor if a vice president had the authority to declassify secrets, Mr. Cheney replied that there's an executive order giving him that power, adding: ''I've certainly advocated declassification and participated in declassification decisions.'' This neatly set up a defense for Scooter, who testified that ''superiors'' had authorized him to leak classified information on Valerie Plame.
President Bush signed Executive Order 13292 on March 25, 2003, amending a Clinton-era order, to grant the vice president the same power as the president on top-secret material. W. must have been concerned that Vice didn't have enough power to abuse.
(With the way these guys keep giving themselves extra powers, there are probably also executive orders that allow Vice-Man to turn himself into a dragon, become invisible and leap tall buildings in a single bound.)
In return for this selfless effort to tell the world that Valerie Plame was a C.I.A. officer -- and punish her husband, a critic of the phony case for war, and therefore a terrorist symp -- Shooter was rewarded with an independent prosecutor and Scooter with an indictment. So when the Great Declassifier gunned down his hunting partner, he was compelled by bitter experience to override his instinct to immediately call a press conference.
The administration has been so apoplectic about leaks, I almost forget the entire Iraq war was paved by its leaks. Cheney & Co. were so busy trying to prove a mushroom cloud was emanating from Saddam's direction, they could not leak their cherry-picked stories fast enough.
Maybe I've had Rummy wrong, too. Maybe he's not an arrogant, misguided Robert McNamara clone.
In his speech to the Council of Foreign Relations yesterday, he sounded positively humble. Gone were the days when Rummy and the neocons thought a big Shock-and-Awe blaze of American might would make Islamic terrorists tremble in their Flintstones caves, never to challenge us again.
Now Rummy paints America as backward, losing the P.R. war to Al Qaeda in the first conflict in history using e-mail, blogs, BlackBerries and hand-held videocameras. ''For the most part,'' he said, ''the U.S. government still functions as a five-and-dime store in an eBay world.'' (Hey, didn't we invent eBay?)
Like the vice president, the defense secretary is eager to get information out. If the American press wouldn't scream, ''Henny Penny, the sky is falling,'' every time the Pentagon tries to plant paid stories in the Iraqi press, for gosh sakes, maybe we could have some success in the P.R. battle.
After the Lincoln Group's ''nontraditional means,'' as he delicately put it, were discovered, ''the resulting explosion of critical press stories then causes everything, all activity, all initiative, to stop, just frozen.''
''Even worse,'' he complained, ''it leads to a chilling effect for those who are asked to serve in the military public affairs field.'' The press ''seems to demand perfection from the government,'' he wailed. And why do the media focus on Abu Ghraib, perpetrated by ''people on the night shift, one night shift in Iraq?'' he asked. Why not more stories on Saddam's mass graves?
Rummy is genuinely perplexed about why it's wrong to subvert democracy while promoting democracy.
I love it when Shooter and Rummy call us unrealistic for trying to hold them to standards that they set. They are, after all, victims of their own spin on Iraq. Mr. Cheney thought we'd be greeted with flowers; Rummy said we could do more with less.
Rummy misses the point: we're supposed to be the good guys, the beacon of freedom. Our message is supposed to work because it has moral force, not because we pay some Lincoln Group sketchballs millions to plant propaganda in Iraqi newspapers and not because the press here plays down revelations of American torture. If the Bush crew hadn't distorted the truth to get to Iraq, it wouldn't need to distort the truth to succeed there.
''Ultimately, in my view,'' Rummy concluded, ''truth wins out.''
Bad news for him, and his pal Dick.
Op-Ed Columnist
Correction:  March 8, 2006, Wednesday  My column of Feb. 18 said that Scooter Libby testified that ''superiors'' had authorized him to leak classified information about Valerie Plame. Rather, Mr. Libby testified that ''superiors'' had authorized him to leak classified information from an intelligence report to rebut critics and justify the Iraq war, not information about Valerie Plame.
	I'm not going all confessional, like one of these bare actresses baring her soul on the cover of Vanity Fair. But I have a desperate secret, as the actresses like to say, that may help others if I talk about it.
Or not.
I am a sleep-eater.
It has happened only a few times, and I'm not sure if it's connected to Ambien. It started last year when a jumbo pack of Oreos mysteriously went missing in my kitchen. I came down one morning to find the plastic sliced open and all the cookies gone. I called my exterminator, certain there was a crumb-covered critter lurking. He never found one.
A couple of other times, when I was staying in hotels with minibars, I found Snickers wrappers by the bed or telltale Toblerone chocolate smears.
I confided in a friend, a fellow occasional Ambien user, who said he woke up sometimes with Jackson Pollock-like splatters of Good & Plenty on his white T-shirts.
New Yorkers have been calling their doctors and nutritionists this week to see whether they should switch hypnotics, now that Minnesota researchers have suggested that Ambien may be creating a new form of ravenous sleeper cells, an alarming development given that some people had actually been taking Ambien to avoid the urge to stay up and raid the fridge.
It may just be a new form of avoirdupois rationalization. (That's my story, dear, and I'm sticking to it.) But a California woman included in one of the studies said she gained 100 pounds from sleep-eating while on Ambien; a Minneapolis woman in a full body cast was discovered by her son sleepwalking to her kitchen, frying bacon and eggs on one night and turning on her oven to 500 degrees on another; a Tennessee nurse said she'd devoured a whole package of hamburger rolls ''like a grizzly bear.''
Susan Chana Lask, a New York City lawyer, has filed a class-action suit against the makers of Ambien on behalf of users -- who are overwhelmingly female. She gives examples of bad behavior by what she calls '' 'Night of the Living Dead' creatures'': driving impaired and eating raw eggs and even a buttered cigarette, and sleep-shoplifting DVD's.
Far more women suffer from insomnia, and far more women -- even young ones -- pop sleeping pills than men. As Ariel Levy wrote in New York magazine, pills are now seen as ''brain styling,'' not mind-altering, because ''the line between medication and recreation has become blurred.''
One girlfriend of mine wanted to call her Upper East Side doctor yesterday and switch to Lunesta. ''I have visions of myself in my Subaru crossing the George Washington Bridge at 3 in the morning covered in Cheetos dust,'' she said. But then she realized they'd probably find out something equally weird about Lunesta next week -- that it causes you to run off with a Starbucks barista and go to male strip clubs in your sleep.
The scary news of zombie hordes of Ambien sleep-eaters follows fast upon the scary news of zombie hordes of Ambien sleep-drivers and zombie hordes of Ambien sleep-sirens.
The New York Observer recounted the saga of an attractive editor at a fashion magazine who hooked up with a young man in Soho and took him back to her place.
''She was laying there and had taken her clothes off,'' he told the paper. ''Then, in completely slurred speech, she said: 'I just took two Ambien, so anything you're going to do, you better do it before I pass out.' ''
The next mishap is sure to be sleep-governing. A headline on Wednesday read ''Study: Ambien Users Invade Countries in Their Sleep; Wake Up With No Memory of Reasons for Invasion, No Exit Strategy.'' The story was written by the humorist Andy Borowitz, who also imagined that an Ambien side effect might be a tendency of some politicians to concoct incomprehensible prescription drug programs while asleep.
But real life once more outstrips satire, as the military in Iraq conducts Ambien air assaults. The president and some Pentagon officials have no memory of authorizing the strikes, and the generals in Iraq have no memory that they've already used these tactics without lasting success.
There is, after all, precedent for Sleepers in Chief. The first President Bush's doctor caught flak for giving him the sleeping pill Halcion -- fingered as a possible contributor to Poppy's embarrassing frow-up moment at a state dinner in Japan.
If you don't want to give up Ambien, doctors say, put chimes on your bedroom door. The tinkling may wake you up on the way to get a snack or take a drive to shoplift a new wardrobe for your fat zombie self.
Op-Ed Columnist John Tierney is on vacation.
	