A MONTH before Super Bowl XLI, it remains unclear which teams will face off on Feb. 4 in Miami. In the other big game that night -- the battle of the Super Bowl advertisers -- the lineup is becoming clearer.
More than a dozen marketers have agreed so far to pay an estimated average of $2.6 million -- a record amount -- for each 30-second commercial that will appear during the CBS broadcast of the game.
As of this week, CBS has sold about 80 percent of the available advertising time, which totals about 30 minutes. That is a typical commercial load for a Super Bowl.
Advertisers will include Super Bowl stalwarts like Anheuser-Busch, FedEx, General Motors and the Frito-Lay and Pepsi-Cola divisions of PepsiCo. There will also be commercials from recent Super Bowl arrivals like CareerBuilder, Diamond Foods and GoDaddy.
Other advertisers, including several movie studios, have bought spots but do not want to identify themselves until closer to game time. These companies want to maximize the hoopla they can generate through public relations campaigns and other marketing techniques.
At a time when Madison Avenue is anxiously seeking alternatives to traditional selling tactics like TV commercials, it is surprising that demand for Super Bowl spots is as ardent as ever 30 days before kickoff.
However, those involved in making the decisions to spend so much money say they have many good reasons to remain in the game.
For one, as audiences split among a seemingly infinite number of media choices, the Super Bowl is almost always the most-watched TV event of the year -- and it is almost always watched live, commercials and all, rather than on a delayed playback using digital video recorders that can zip through the spots.
Also, Super Bowl marketing has been rapidly evolving to add nontraditional methods to reach consumers. For example, computer users can watch the commercials online after the game on Web sites like aol.com, video.google.com, video.yahoo.com and youtube.com.
And consumers are being invited to enter contests to create Super Bowl spots as part of a trend known as user-generated content. At least three advertisers are sponsoring such contests during Super Bowl XLI: the Chevrolet division of General Motors, the Doritos brand sold by Frito-Lay and the National Football League.
''There is no other platform quite like the Super Bowl,'' said Robert Lachky, executive vice president for global industry development and chief creative officer at the Anheuser-Busch beer division of Anheuser-Busch in St. Louis.
For several years, Anheuser-Busch has bought the most commercial time of any Super Bowl advertiser, about five minutes in each game. The company will maintain that ranking again, planning to run 10 spots for three brands it brews -- Budweiser, Bud Light and Bud Select -- and one it imports, probably Grolsch from the Netherlands.
''It's worth it,'' Mr. Lachky said of the cost. ''When you can touch that many households, that many adults, in one sitting, it's actually efficient.''
Being the game's biggest sponsor also works for Anheuser-Busch from a timing standpoint, Mr. Lachky said, because the next day the company intends to introduce a significant advertising initiative, an online entertainment network called Bud.TV that will be on a Web site with the bud.tv address.
Bud.TV will feature all the Anheuser-Busch commercials seen during during the game, Mr. Lachky said, along with content like video clips, sports programs and talk shows.
''We will definitely be 'popping' Bud.TV via one of our billboards,'' Mr. Lachky said, referring to the moments during the game when brand logos are superimposed on screen as an announcer lists the sponsors.
Anheuser-Busch spends weeks each year testing batches of would-be Super Bowl spots before deciding on the final lineups. Sometimes, decisions are not made until the day before the game.
The Grolsch commercial being considered for the Super Bowl is being created by the St. Louis office of Momentum, owned by the Interpublic Group. The spots under consideration for the Bud brands are being created, Mr. Lachky said, by Cannonball in St. Louis and three agencies that are part of the Omnicom Group: the Chicago office of DDB Worldwide, Downtown Partners in Toronto and Goodby, Silverstein & Partners in San Francisco.
Goodby, Silverstein could be a Super Bowl double-dipper. A humorous 30-second spot it is producing for the Emerald brand of snack nuts sold by Diamond Foods will run in the third quarter. This will be the third consecutive year for Emerald as a Super Bowl advertiser.
''The Super Bowl is an event, an event that lives on,'' said Andrew Burke, vice president for marketing at Diamond in Stockton, Calif. ''It's about the next day, when people in their office say to each other, 'Did you see that guy in that Super Bowl commercial?' ''
Hoping to include Emerald in that chatter, the commercial created by Goodby, Silverstein will be ''a little bit different, a little bit irreverent,'' Mr. Burke promised, featuring the singer and actor Robert Goulet in an offbeat performance.
To generate additional attention, Mr. Burke said, there will be video clips on a Web site, promotions, signs in stores and coupons.
GoDaddy, which registers Web site names, will be back for a third straight year. The company will run one or two commercials that will represent the first work from its new agency, the Shine Advertising Company in Madison, Wis.
Curt Hanke, account director at Shine, said yesterday that he would not be able to discuss the campaign for a week or two. In the 2005 and 2006 Super Bowls, GoDaddy ran risqué commercials that raised some eyebrows; the reactions to the spots were described in copious detail on a blog written by the GoDaddy president, Bob Parsons.
The estimated average price tag for each 30-second commercial in the game, at $2.6 million, is slightly ahead of the estimated average cost for each spot during Super Bowl XL, which was $2.5 million.
The sales activity is ''pacing very close to where we were at this time three years ago'' when CBS last broadcast a Super Bowl, said JoAnn Ross, president for network sales at CBS in New York, part of the CBS Corporation.
''We're getting there,'' she added, referring to the eventual goal of being sold out. ''We're not wringing our hands or gritting our teeth.''
The steps the network is taking to stir up Super Bowl excitement will include a special, ''Super Bowl's Greatest Commercials 2007,'' to be broadcast on Feb. 2, Ms. Ross said. CBS is also exploring the idea of offering Super Bowl sponsors the opportunity to make their spots available online on the CBS SportsLine Web site (cbssportsline.com).
ADVERTISING
	CAN an agency known for offbeat campaigns that appeal to younger men, for brands like Nike, ESPN and Miller High Life, freshen the stodgy image of the Old Spice line of men's grooming products?
That is the estimated $100 million question being asked as the agency, Wieden & Kennedy, introduces this week its first work for Old Spice since landing the creative and media accounts for the brand in February 2006.
A television, print and online campaign with the theme ''Experience is everything'' will take a cheeky look at modern masculinity as it seeks to extol the virtues of Old Spice as a brand family as well as to stimulate sales of specific products like deodorants, body washes and fragrances.
For example, a Web site (experienceoldspice.com) will provide advice on topics like ''Animals you can ride and how to ride them,'' ''Easy ways to avoid getting picked in a lineup'' and ''How to talk your way across an African border sans passport.''
Print ads will offer wry captions for photographs of subjects like a shepherd (''This man loves sheep''), a woman eating an ice cream cone and a foot-long frankfurter. And commercials will feature a puckish spokesman, the actor Bruce Campbell of the droll ''Evil Dead'' movies, sending up the concept of taking advice from your elders.
The maker of Old Spice, Procter & Gamble, surprised Madison Avenue last year by shifting the assignments for the brand, with spending estimated at $100 million a year, to Wieden & Kennedy from two much larger Procter mainstay agencies, Saatchi & Saatchi and the Starcom MediaVest Group, both part of the Publicis Groupe.
Wieden & Kennedy is best known for its assertive ads for Nike (''Just do it''), a series of wacky spots for the ''SportsCenter'' show on ESPN and the dryly humorous ''High Life Man'' campaign for Miller High Life beer. The Old Spice account includes sibling products sold under names like High Endurance and Red Zone along with the familiar cologne and after-shave in the buoy-shaped bottles, which date to 1938.
Procter has long been famous for earnest, product-oriented campaigns concentrating on the efficacy of its detergents, soaps and shampoos and replete with demonstrations pitting ''Brand X'' against Procter counterparts. Such straightforward, prosaic approaches have lost favor, however, with the younger consumers that advertisers most covet.
Proof of that is the startlingly rapid growth of the Axe line of men's grooming products sold by a principal Procter rival, Unilever, which now vie for category leadership with Old Spice in sales at drug stores and discount chains. (Old Spice sales have grown, too, but Axe's have grown at a faster pace.)
Axe ads, created by Bartle Bogle Hegarty, take a zany, off-kilter approach as embodied by slogans like ''How dirty boys get clean.'' Axe campaigns celebrate the sex appeal with which Axe promises to imbue its users rather than how effective the brand is in killing the germs that cause perspiration odor.
As a result, Procter began to rethink its creative approach for brands like Old Spice. After many exploratory meetings with Wieden & Kennedy and similar agencies -- iconoclastic independents with reputations for rule-breaking ads -- Procter finally gave Wieden & Kennedy some work, first the Eukanuba pet-food assignment in 2005 and then Old Spice.
''This is part of a significant brand-building experiment at P.& G.,'' said Carl Stealey, Old Spice brand manager at Procter in Cincinnati.
''We are a product-based company,'' he added. ''As the men's grooming category explodes and new entrants come in, we've had to evolve and refine our positioning.''
''Wieden has tremendous capability and expertise in reaching the young target, talking with them as opposed to at them,'' Mr. Stealey said, referring to campaigns for ESPN and Nike that are aimed at the same audience as Old Spice, generally males ages 12 to 34.
Research aimed at the target consumer found something unexpected: the Old Spice brand's legacy was a benefit rather than a burden. The reason was that younger consumers tend to seek out venerable products they perceive as cool because they are authentic; examples include Converse sneakers and Lee jeans.
''Previous generations loved Old Spice and had a more emotional attachment to it,'' said Monica Taylor, an art director at Wieden & Kennedy who is one of two creative directors on the account. ''I remember my dad using it; it was such a deep, rich brand.''
Mark Fitzloff, a copywriter at Wieden & Kennedy who is the other creative director on the account, chimed in: ''If you put Nikes on your feet, you're making a statement. If you're using Old Spice, you're not. Procter wanted to see if they could change that.''
''Our timing was good because this is a moment when everyone appreciates authenticity, when retro is not necessarily a bad word,'' Mr. Fitzloff said. ''So we can say, 'You can either be authentic or trendy.' ''
That also helps Old Spice, which has been around for decades, to sharpen its differentiation from Axe, which Unilever introduced in the United States only four years ago.
''They have a clean slate,'' Ms. Taylor said of the Axe products, which also include fragrances, deodorants and body washes, ''but they have had to invent a personality.''
To underscore authenticity for Old Spice, the campaign gives a prominent role to the brand's original trappings and trade dress, including the cursive script logo, the clipper ship from the fragrance bottles and the vintage whistled commercial jingle. But they are treated playfully rather than reverentially, in a manner Ms. Taylor described as an ''inside-the-joke feeling.''
For example, a print ad for Old Spice fragrance, featuring a 1968 photograph of the actress Faye Dunaway sprawled out before a roaring fire, declares, ''If your grandfather hadn't worn it, you wouldn't exist.''
And the commercials with Mr. Campbell make a visual jest by showing him passing a painting of the clipper ship as he walks across a room. The joke comes when viewers realize the painting runs the length of the room and the ship has scores of sails and masts.
''The tone does have, I would say, a self-awareness,'' Mr. Stealey said, ''a sort of wink about it that by and large is lacking in the category.''
''We're looking forward to the results,'' he added.
The theme of ''Experience is everything'' is meant to convey ''that with our heritage and history, Old Spice is uniquely positioned to get you that experience,'' Mr. Stealey said, adding: ''For years, we've been counseled to drop the 'Old' from 'Old Spice.' I'm here to say we will not do that.''
Too bad that it is probably too late for General Motors to bring back Oldsmobile.
ADVERTISING
	TOYOTA feels the need  the need for speed -- Speed Channel, that is, as the automaker and cable network join forces for an unusual program in which the Toyota FJ Cruiser plays a starring role.
The hourlong special, called ''Two Roads to Baja,'' is scheduled for 8 p.m. (Eastern time) tomorrow on Speed, owned by the News Corporation; plans call for four repeats in the next three weeks. Speed is promoting the show with a two-minute trailer that can be watched on its Web site (speedtv.com).
The program follows the adventures, and misadventures, of two teams that competed in November in the 39th edition of the Baja 1000 off-road endurance race. Both teams -- one composed of amateurs, the other of professionals -- drove FJ Cruisers, a sport utility that Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A. revived last year with a restyled version evocative of its predecessors, which were made from 1960 to 1983.
Although the Toyota agency, Saatchi & Saatchi, worked on making the show, along with @Radical.media, it was produced like an entertainment program rather than an ad or infomercial. The sole clue of its provenance is the copyright notice at the end, shared by Speed and Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A.
''Two Roads to Baja'' is an example of an increasingly popular marketing tactic known as branded entertainment, in which advertisers embed brands and products into the plots of TV shows. Other marketers adopting the practice include Match.com, Nike, OfficeMax and Unilever.
The concept may be borrowed from the early days of television, when marketers produced the programming, but it is intended to solve a contemporary problem: the growing ability of viewers to avoid traditional commercials.
''Two Roads to Baja'' will carry commercials, but none for the FJ Cruiser; advertisers include Castrol, B. F. Goodrich, Lowe's and Yamaha. One could make the case that because the Toyota sport utility plays such a crucial part in the show, commercials for it would be redundant.
Toyota has no plans to run TV commercials anywhere for FJ Cruiser because of a belief that the target audience -- primarily men from 25 to 49 -- is more effectively reached through nontraditional marketing efforts like branded entertainment.
''It's new for us to be producing a program,'' said Kim McCullough, corporate manager for marketing communications at Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A. in Torrance, Calif. ''But it's very much in keeping with our strategy as we look for different ways to engage with consumers.''
It was important that viewers perceive the program as ''entertainment-oriented, something you would very much see on Speed,'' Ms. McCullough said, because ''these are savvy people who can tell if it feels artificial.''
''Speed wants to protect its brand, too,'' she added, ''and put on shows that feel genuine.''
Bobby Akin, vice president at Speed in Los Angeles, which is focused on motor sports programming -- ''anything with an engine that goes fast,'' as he put it -- agreed with Ms. McCullough.
''It does us no good if viewers say, 'Why am I watching this for?' '' Mr. Akin said.
''At the end of the day, the FJ is a big part of the show,'' he added. ''But Kim was very clear that this story was going to get told no matter what happened, even if the car fell out 100 yards into the 1,000-mile race.''
''Two Roads to Baja'' is the first show on Speed with this kind of advertiser involvement, Mr. Akin said. ''We don't have anything else like this in the works right now. But on a case-by-case basis, if the right pieces of the puzzle came together, we'd love to do something like it.''
The team for ''Two Roads to Baja'' also included Paul Czaplicki, truck advertising manager at Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A.; Jeff Zwart, who directed the show for @Radical.media; and two members of the creative staff at the Los Angeles office of Saatchi & Saatchi, Bill Courtney and Napper Tandy.
''The show's a great example of how we as an agency are trying to move beyond pure advertising,'' said Chuck Maguy, group account director at Saatchi & Saatchi, part of the Publicis Groupe. ''The mission is to harness and influence pop culture on behalf of our brands.''
For FJ Cruiser, Mr. Maguy said, if you approach the target audience ''directly with a marketing message, they'll tune it out; you have to connect with them, with their passions.''
To that end, video clips from ''Two Roads to Baja'' will appear on Web sites like heavy.com and youtube.com in addition to toyota.com.
Print ads for FJ Cruiser are running only in magazines read by what Ms. McCullough described as ''hard-core enthusiasts'' like 4-Wheel & Off-Road and Four Wheeler, along with publications aimed at owners of the original versions of the sport utility.
The ads, featuring black-and-white photographs of parts like clutches, undercarriages and suspensions, are punched along the sides so they can be stored in binders.
Toyota sold 55,809 FJ Cruisers last year, compared with a goal of 46,000. The goal for 2007 is 60,000. Ad spending last year totaled $2.8 million, according to TNS Media Intelligence, reflecting the absence of TV commercials.
ADVERTISING
	