There was a touch of parody to the giddy Democrat takeover this week: Nancy Pelosi indulging her inner Haight-Ashbury and dipping the Capitol in tie-dye, sashaying around with the Grateful Dead, Wyclef Jean, Carole King, Richard Gere, feminists and a swarm of well-connected urchins.
The first act of House Democrats who promised to govern with bipartisan comity was imperiously banishing Republicans from participating in the initial round of lawmaking. Even if Republicans were brutes during their reign, Democrats should have shown more class, letting the whiny minority party offer some stupid amendments that would lose.
Perhaps the Democrats' power-shift into overdrive is a neurological disorder, or neuropolitical disorder.
If free will is an illusion -- if we are, as one philosopher put it, ''nothing more than sophisticated meat machines,'' doomed to repeat the same mistakes over and over -- that would explain a lot about the latest trend in which everyone is reverting to type.
William James wrote in 1890 that the whole ''sting and excitement'' of life comes from ''our sense that in it things are really being decided from one moment to another, and that it is not the dull rattling off of a chain that was forged innumerable ages ago.''
But in Science Times this week, Dennis Overbye advised Dr. James to ''get over it,'' observing that ''a bevy of experiments in recent years suggest that the conscious mind is like a monkey riding a tiger of subconscious decisions and actions in progress, frantically making up stories about being in control.''
As Mark Hallett of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke told Mr. Overbye, ''Free will does exist, but it's a perception, not a power or a driving force.  The more you scrutinize it, the more you realize you don't have it.''
That would explain why, after voters insisted that the president wrap it up in Iraq, he made a big show of pretending to listen, then decided to do a war do-over.
Is this just the baked-in stubbornness of one man, or is W.'s behavior evidence that he has no free will? Is the Decider freely choosing another huge blunder or is he taking instructions from his genetic and political coding, fearing that if he admits what a foul hash he's made of Iraq, he'll be labeled a wimp, as his dad was?
If W. is trapped on a tiger, he's not the only one.
John McCain can't get beyond seeing himself as a maverick now that he's become a nonmaverick, a right-wing Republican urging an escalation of a hopeless war, even though he's already lived through an escalation of a hopeless war.
''There are two keys to any surge in U.S. troops,'' Senator McCain told an appreciative audience at the American Enterprise Institute yesterday. ''It must be substantial, and it must be sustained.''
With the letter she and Harry Reid wrote to the president yesterday, warning him that ''we are well past the point of more troops for Iraq,'' Speaker Pelosi tried to exert her free will to stop the Surge. But the Democrats aren't willing to take real action and cut off money for the Surge. They're predetermined to want to have it both ways: not to be blamed for the war and not to be blamed for pulling the plug on the war.
Iraq has become a snake pit of factions failing to escape fate. Shiites and Sunnis have been fighting and killing each other for about 1,400 years over who was the rightful heir to Muhammad, and yet the entire American high command was somehow taken aback that Shiites and Sunnis can't muster the free will to keep their country from disintegrating.
Could it have been kismet that there were Shiites taunting Saddam at his hanging? Maybe it was preordained back in the days when Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone and the British diplomat Gertrude Bell drew the boundaries of the modern Iraq that a security guy with a cellphone would capture the spectacle.
Despite all the talk back in the 2000 campaign about a robustly experienced foreign-policy dream team, it may have been destined that the Bush administration would be asleep in the run-up to the insurgency, just as it was asleep in the run-up to 9/11, to Katrina, to the occupation and to the refugee crisis in Iraq. Either all that was predetermined, or the administration was preternaturally negligent.
Arthur Schopenhauer, the German philosopher who said a man can do what he wants but cannot will what he wants, would have understood W.'s nonsensical urge to Surge.
We don't know if human beings have free will. We just know that human beings in Washington appear not to.
Op-Ed Columnist
	Madame Speaker didn't lean over and boink the president on the head with her gavel, or garrote him with her red pashmina.
No one was gelded or cuckolded or left to bleed on the floor of the Senate, as in HBO's ''Rome,'' that other gory saga of a declining empire with people who can't stop talking.
Still, the nation's capital had the aroma of treachery, as former allies brutally turned on one another. Despite W.'s attempt to salvage his presidency last night by changing the subject and going all domestic-sensitive, Washington was more consumed with betrayal than substance.
The city was riveted by opening statements in the Scooter Libby trial, where the aspens were turning but not in clusters. Scooter's lawyer claimed that the White House had made his client a scapegoat in the Valerie Plame case to protect Karl Rove because ''Boy Genius,'' as W. calls him, was critical to keeping the Republican Party in power.
In light of the 2006 debacle, the White House might have been better off saving Scooter and making Karl the fall guy.
Vice got an extra dose of unflattering limelight in the debut issue of The Politico, a Capitol Hill publication. In an interview with Roger Simon, John McCain stopped pandering to the White House long enough to lambaste Dick Cheney for stirring a ''witch's brew'' of a ''terribly mishandled'' war. What took the brave senator so long?
''The president listened too much to the vice president,'' he said, adding, ''Of course, the president bears the ultimate responsibility, but he was very badly served by both the vice president and, most of all, the secretary of defense.''
At a critical hearing yesterday, senators happily blew a chance to grill Lt. Gen. David Petraeus, W.'s choice to try to rescue Iraq, on whether those 21,500 additional troops will be cavalry to the rescue or lambs to the slaughter.
Why dwell on the most consequential elements of American strategy when they can linger over something even more repercussive: their own political reputations?
Hillary Clinton, who dodged a recent important Iraq hearing by flying to Iraq, did not have any questions at all for the general. She simply lectured him crisply on her belated discovery that the administration has a ''dead-end'' and ''blank check'' policy, as she tried to seem like the kind of gal who could command the most powerful military on earth. This is odd from someone who is running infomercials on her Web site promising ''a conversation.''
In their questioning, Senator Joe Lieberman and Mr. McCain seemed most interested in enlisting the general's prestige for their own campaign to discredit colleagues in both parties who are tired of passively watching W.'s disaster unfold.
If the Senate sends the additional troops but conveys the belief they cannot succeed, Mr. McCain asked, ''what effect does that have on the morale of your troops?''
''It would not be a beneficial effect,'' the general replied.
Senator Lieberman also asked whether a Senate resolution expressing disapproval of The Surge would give the enemy in Iraq ''encouragement'' that the American people ''were divided.''
The general agreed: ''That's correct, sir.''
Much of the rest of the hearing was squandered in attempts by Democrats and Republicans who had criticized the war to get the general to back away from his opinion that the troops would be hurt and the enemy emboldened by any impediment that the legislative branch might throw in W.'s way.
''Honorable people have different views, and they will voice their criticisms,'' chided John Warner, who presented a bipartisan resolution on Monday declaring that the Senate ''disagrees with the 'plan' to augment our forces.''
He told General Petraeus that as President Nixon's secretary of the Navy, he had sat where the general was, justifying another impossible war. ''I hope,'' he warned the witness, ''that this colloquy has not entrapped you into some responses that you might later regret.''
The fact that Senator Warner attacked The Surge in a formal way means that a substantial majority of the Senate are willing to stick their necks out. It's the beginning of a slow procession to limit spending on the war and rein in Mr. Bush.
As one does in a job interview, the general tried to oblige everyone. After getting caught in a political mine field, he demurred that he had learned ''that mine fields are best avoided and gone around rather than walked through.''
The poor man. He probably thought that he came all this way to talk about how to fight the war, not to talk about how to talk about the war.
Op-Ed Columnist
	When she was little, Hillary Rodham would sit on a basement bench and pretend she was flying a spaceship to Mars. Her younger brother Hugh, perched behind, would sometimes beg for a chance to be captain.
No dice. ''She would always drive, and I would always have to sit in the back,'' he once told me.
Through all the years of sitting behind Bill Clinton on his trip to the stars, Hillary fidgeted and elbowed, trying to be co-captain rather than just wingman, or worse, winglady.
Finally, in Iowa, she was once more behind the wheel of her spaceship to Mars. She didn't have to prop up Bill after one of his roguish pratfalls. She didn't have to feign interest in East Wing piffle -- table settings and pastry chefs and designer gowns. She didn't have to defer to her male colleagues in the Senate, stepping back to give them the limelight.
She positively glistened as she talked about how ''I'' -- rather than the ''we'' of '92 -- would run the world.
Humbly, graciously, deftly, she offered Iowa the answer to that eternal question, What Is Hillary Owed?
Everything.
John Wood, a self-described ''plainsman,'' Republican and machinery-and-tool salesman from Davenport, asked Hillary how she would handle the world's evil and bad men, provoking the slyly ambiguous retort: ''What in my background equips me to deal with evil and bad men?''
He said afterward that he was more worried about her ability to face down villains, ''being a lady,'' but conceded, ''The woman did good today.''
(His question was reminiscent of Ali G's interview of Newt Gingrich, when the faux rapper asked whether a woman president would be turned on and manipulated by evil dictators, given that, with women, ''the worse you treat 'em, the more they want you.'')
As YouTube attests, Hillary didn't care about style as first lady; she was too busy trying to get in on Bill's substance. She showed off a long parade of unflattering outfits and unnervingly changing hairdos.
In Iowa, her national anthem may have been off-key, but her look wasn't. It was an attractive mirror of her political message: man-tailored with a dash of pink femininity.
''I think you look very nice,'' a veteran of the first gulf war told her in Des Moines.
''Thank you!'' she answered, beaming and laughing.
When Geraldine Ferraro made her historic run in '84, she tried to blend a mother's concerns into her foreign policy answers, but it did not work so well once she started getting her nuclear terminology mixed up.
Hillary dealt with the issue head-on -- ''I'm a woman; I'm a mom'' -- hoping to stir that sisterly vote that Ms. Ferraro failed to draw after it turned out that many women were skeptical about one of their own facing down the Soviets.
Unlike Barack Obama, who once said he was bored by the suburbs, she introduced herself in the land of bingo and bacon as a product of the suburbs, wallowing in the minutiae of kitchen-table issues.
W. and Cheney have lavished attention and money on Iraq, leaving Americans feeling neglected. Hillary offered Iowans a warm bath of ''you,'' homey rumination rather than harsh domination.
(Though Jon Stewart warned on ''The Daily Show'' that her slogan -- ''Let the conversation begin!'' -- will not help her with men. ''I think the typical response would be, 'Now?' '' he said, adding that her new Iraq policy is, ''America, let's pull over and just ask for directions.'')
Thomasine Johnson, a 66-year-old African-American from outside Des Moines, complained that Hillary talked too much about ''traditional women's issues,'' but many in the audiences seemed enthralled.
The Achilles' heel of ''The Warrior,'' as she is known, is the war. She expressed outrage about Iraq, but ended up sounding like a mother whose teenage son has not cleaned up his room: ''The president has said this is going to be left to his successor  and I think it's the height of irresponsibility, and I really resent it.''
She uttered the most irritating and disingenuous nine words in politics: ''If we had known then what we know now. ''
Jim Webb knew. Barack Obama knew. Even I knew, for Pete's sake. The administration's trickery was clear in real time.
Hillary didn't have the nerve to oppose a popular president on a national security issue after 9/11, and she feared being cast as an antiwar hippie when she ran. Now she feels she can't simply say she made a bad decision. And that makes her seem conniving -- not a good mix with nurturing.
Op-Ed Columnist
	