Nestled in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains outside this village in northern New Mexico, the Pecos Benedictine Monastery has long been considered cut from a different cloth from many other Roman Catholic religious communities.
Its chapel is in a structure that, more than 50 years ago, was part of a dude ranch where burnt-out urbanites came to relax. The gift shop is in an old adobe building that was a stop on the Pony Express. Solar panels adorn much of the stucco complex, a well-known location for combining the study of Christian spirituality and Jungian dream analysis.
The monastery acquired much of its open-minded character in the 1970's, when followers of the Charismatic Renewal Movement, which emphasized healing through prophecy and prayer, as well as speaking in tongues and a welcoming approach to women, arrived here. Men and women were drawn to Pecos and stayed, forming an unusual monastery where both monks and nuns had close contact, worshipping, eating, conducting retreats and raising honeybees together.
But the monastery today is going through a rough transition. After an effort last October to attain canonical status for the five women at the monastery, who were considered nuns by the 15 monks living here, the women were told by the Vatican that they were not nuns in the opinion of the church.
The Vatican recommended that the women move to a convent in Jonesboro, Ark., for a novitiate of one year, a period to prepare them to take their final vows. After that, the Vatican said, the women would be allowed to return to Pecos to create their own convent, but must restrict their daily contact with the monks during meals and worship.
''Unfortunately, the sisters were not aware of the nuances of pursuing the canonical status,'' said the Rev. Christopher Zielinski, 52, an Ohioan who took over as the monastery's abbot two years ago after living more than 30 years in Italy. ''It's been a trauma for us to have to go through this.''
Despite living in Pecos for many years, three of the women, Hilary Case, Ann Cic and Therese Gonneville, decided to leave the monastery altogether rather than submit to the requests from Rome. Two went to a monastic community of about 30 women in the Pacific Northwest, while another may go to a monastery in Hawaii.
''I don't feel comfortable commenting,'' Ms. Gonneville said, speaking by telephone from her new home at the St. Placid Priory in Olympia, Wash. The two other women did not respond to telephone messages seeking comment. The two remaining women at Pecos Benedictine Monastery, Miriam Randall and Helen Vasquez, also did not respond to requests for an interview.
The strife concerning the nuns, which was made public in a recent article in The Santa Fe New Mexican, has generated concern about the monastery beyond its 1,200 acres of land hugging the Pecos River. Residents of Pecos who grew up near the monastery had watched it evolve over the years, from its founding in 1955 as an all-male Benedictine community.
''It's a step backward for a place that was so eye-opening and tolerant,'' said Janice Varela, 47, a community organizer with the New Mexico Acequia Association who lives in Pecos and remembers going to youth retreats at the monastery.
The monastery became affiliated with the Olivetan Congregation of Italy in the 1980's, figuring the Olivetans had recognized religious communities housing both women and men in Europe in the past, though those arrangements generally involved greater separation between monks and nuns, Father Zielinski said.
''There's always a risk of not being congruent with the aims and missions of the church when things are done ad hoc,'' said the Rev. Robert J. Kaslyn, a professor of canon law at Catholic University in Washington.
Still, Father Zielinski said in an interview that he had reached an accommodation with church officials that would prevent the two remaining women at the monastery from decamping to Arkansas for a novitiate. Instead, he said he would ask the Archdiocese of Santa Fe for a decree recognizing the women as nuns. In addition, Father Zielinski said arrangements would be made to provide the women and future nuns with a deed to some of the property at the monastery in an effort to give them some financial independence.
Father Zielinski said he saw wisdom in the new arrangement. He said it would give the women greater autonomy and formalize their status at the complex, preventing a future abbot, for example, from deciding that women were not welcome at Pecos and turning them out.
Meanwhile, other challenges, largely financial, weigh on the entire monastery as it searches for ways to reduce its reliance on the donations that account for about a third of its budget. In a plan that might focus even further attention on the monastery, it has formed a venture with another New Mexico cloister, the Monastery of Christ in the Desert of Abiquiú, to open a brewery on the grounds at Pecos.
As in its troubled efforts to reconcile the intermingling of men and women, the idea for the brewery, whose product would be called Monk's Ale, is to find a way to allow the monastery to survive well into this century with its character intact.
''Pecos,'' Father Zielinski said, ''can have a prophetic role in the renewal of religious life in the church.''
Religion Journal
	