Osbaldo Torres, a convicted murderer on death row in Oklahoma, should have been dead by now, his appeals exhausted, his time up.
But because 15 judges in The Hague, acting at the request of the government of Mexico, have forbidden his execution for now, he is alive in a cell in McAlester, awaiting the next move from the Netherlands.
Mr. Torres belongs to a subset of death-row inmates at the center of a struggle that has crossed national borders and raised combustible questions about the death penalty, due process, the reach of international law and the United States' standing in the court of world opinion.
He is one of 52 Mexican citizens in eight states whose convictions and death sentences are being challenged by Mexico in the International Court of Justice in The Hague. Mexico says the United States violated a treaty guaranteeing that foreigners arrested in this country have access to representatives of their government.
The court ordered the United States last February not to kill Mr. Torres and two compatriots, at least until it issues its final ruling, which is expected to come in the spring.
None of the 52 Mexicans have been put to death. In Mr. Torres's case, the Oklahoma attorney general asked a state appeals court in November to stay the execution ''out of courtesy'' to the international court. It was an unprecedented act of deference by an American official, legal experts said.
Mexico is seeking to void all 52 convictions and death sentences, contending that its citizens were denied the right to meet promptly with Mexican diplomats. The defendants should be retried, Mexico says, with statements obtained before such meetings excluded.
Mexico also asked the court to require that the United States honor these so-called consular rights in the future, perhaps by rewriting the standard Miranda warning given suspects before they are questioned by the police.
In its filings in The Hague, the United States, represented by lawyers from the State and Justice Departments, called Mexico's demands ''an unjustified, unwise and ultimately unacceptable intrusion into the United States criminal justice system.''
The acquiescence of the Oklahoma attorney general, Drew Edmondson, given after consultations with the State Department, is thus remarkable. It may reflect tactical prudence, as the international court is not likely to welcome being defied while the larger case is pending. Or it may indicate a desire by the United States to maintain a level of international comity, even as the war in Iraq and the widespread use of the death penalty in the United States have been criticized by some of its allies.
The United States' arguments before The Hague are not quite those of a global scofflaw. This country has, in fact, been a party to the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations since 1969, as well as to a separate protocol in which it submitted to the jurisdiction of the international court to interpret the convention and to resolve disputes about it. Treaties are, under the Constitution, ''the supreme law of the land.''
Although the United States does not view the rulings of many international bodies as binding, it does acknowledge the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice to decide cases brought under the consular relations convention and, in some circumstances, to order nations to comply with the court's interpretation of it. In the Mexican case, however, the United States contends that the court lacks jurisdiction to determine by ''highly specific means'' what nations must do to comply.
One hundred sixty-four other nations are also parties to the convention, and the United States invokes it often when its citizens are detained abroad.
''If you were arrested in Damascus and they gave you a dime,'' said Donald F. Donovan, a lawyer at Debevoise & Plimpton, which represents Mexico in the case, ''would you want to call your court-appointed lawyer or the American embassy?''
The convention requires that arrested foreigners be told of their right to speak with consular officials. If they do, local officials must contact the appropriate consulate. Both actions, the convention says, must be taken ''without delay.''
Mexico contends that these obligations are often ignored in the United States, and that Mexican officials frequently learn of arrests of Mexican citizens only years later, and only by happenstance. The two nations differ about how well Mexico, which does not have the death penalty, complies with the convention.
The Mexican government says it did not learn of the 1993 arrest of Mr. Torres, then 18, until 1996. Mr. Torres had lived in the United States since he was 5, prosecutors said.
By the time Mexico learned of the charges against Mr. Torres, from relatives, he had already been twice tried for the murder of a couple in front of their children. The first trial ended in a mistrial because the jury could not agree about whether he was guilty. The second ended with a death sentence.
When Mr. Torres's lawyers then tried to raise the Vienna Convention in his defense, courts said that the defendant was too late, and that he would not have benefited from Mexican assistance in any event.
Mexico disputes that.
''When consular protection is permitted to function,'' Victor Manuel Uribe Avina of the Mexican foreign affairs ministry told the Hague court last month, ''life sentences are the likely outcome.''
Mexico says it provides an important ''cultural bridge'' when its citizens become entangled in the American criminal justice system. Such defendants are often confused, distrustful, unable to speak English and baffled by American procedures, Mexican officials say. If notified, the Mexican government provides lawyers, translators and investigators. It also helps round up evidence in Mexico, which can be very valuable in the sentencing phase in capital cases.
There are 122 foreign citizens from 31 countries on death row in the United States, in 14 states and in the federal system, according to Human Rights Research, a consulting firm that assists lawyers and consulates in capital cases involving foreigners. Almost half are from Mexico.
The issue has been an ongoing source of tension between Mexico and the United States, and in January 2003 Mexico took its case to the international court. Three Mexicans have been executed since 2000. In all three cases, the Vienna Convention was violated, Mexico argues. In 2002, Vicente Fox, the Mexican president, canceled a trip to President Bush's ranch in Texas to protest the execution of one of the men, Javier Suarez Medina.
There is little dispute that the United States violated the treaty in most or all of the 52 cases before the court in The Hague. The core issue during several days of arguments before the court last month was what should follow from that.
Until not long ago, the government's official position was that an apology should suffice. After a decision of the international court in 2001 that violations require ''review and reconsideration,'' the United States has taken the position that it has complied with that ruling, in cases including Mr. Torres's, by encouraging governors to consider Vienna Convention claims as part of clemency proceedings.
''The United States says the only remedy a defendant is entitled to is an opportunity to beg for mercy,'' said Sandra L. Babcock, a Minneapolis lawyer and the director of the Mexican Capital Legal Assistance Program. ''But we're talking about a legal right. It requires a legal remedy.''
At The Hague last month and in legal filings, State Department lawyers described ''the very substantial efforts undertaken by the United States to comply with its obligations,'' including the circulation of 100,000 copies of a compliance manual and 600,000 pocket cards to local law enforcement officials. Still, they noted, there are 700,000 law enforcement officials in the United States in 18,000 separate state and local jurisdictions.
Catherine W. Brown, a State Department lawyer, told the international court last month that asking more of the United States was unreasonable. ''As a practical matter, a country the size of the United States would never have accepted an obligation that would have put the ordinary conduct of criminal investigations and public safety at jeopardy,'' Ms. Brown said.
A State Department spokeswoman declined to comment on Mr. Torres's pending execution in Oklahoma and those of two defendants in Texas that would presumably have taken place by now, but for the case in The Hague.
In March, the department's top lawyer acknowledged in a speech to state attorneys general that the pending executions were a matter of concern. ''We have had a number of conversations with government lawyers in both states about these cases,'' the lawyer, William Howard Taft IV, said. In November, Mr. Torres asked the United States Supreme Court to honor the international court's interim order staying his execution. The Supreme Court declined to hear the case. Justices John Paul Stevens and Stephen Breyer indicated that they would be inclined to consider it once the international court rendered its final judgment.
''The answer to Lord Ellenborough's famous rhetorical question, 'Can the Island of Tobago pass a law to bind the whole world?,' may well be yes,'' Justice Breyer mused, ''where the world has conferred such binding authority through treaty.''
Mr. Edmondson, the Oklahoma attorney general, effectively stopped the execution the same day the Supreme Court failed to act, and Mr. Torres remains in a sort of limbo, caught between two legal systems. Charlie Price, a spokesman for Mr. Edmondson, said that would continue until the 15 judges in the Netherlands ruled.
	FOOLS RUSH IN
Steve Case, Jerry Levin, and the
Unmaking of AOL Time Warner.
By Nina Munk.
Illustrated. 352 pp. New York:
HarperBusiness. $26.95.
THERE MUST BE A PONY IN HERE SOMEWHERE
The AOL Time Warner Debacle and
the Quest for a Digital Future.
By Kara Swisher with Lisa Dickey.
Illustrated. 306 pp. New York:
Crown Business. $24.95.
The catastrophic merger of America Online and Time Warner, announced in January 2000 and completed a year later, was, Kara Swisher writes, ''the heist of the very new century.'' AOL, which sells access to the Internet over telephone lines, managed to buy a storied media conglomerate that included Time magazine, the Warner Brothers movie studio, CNN, theme parks and book publishers, using wildly inflated dot-com wampum.
Why AOL would want to convert its overvalued stock into something more tangible, as the economic fever of the late 1990's spiked, was obvious. You might even call the acquisition savvy, except that it now appears that AOL's numbers were doubly inflated, both by mania and by questionable accounting. The tougher question is why in the world Gerald M. Levin, the chairman of Time Warner, decided to sell his company to a boring, dinky Internet service provider, or I.S.P., that was about to be swamped by faster services, including Time Warner's own cable systems.
In 2002, Robert Hughes, Time magazine's art critic, put that question to Levin in an e-mail message later published in Tina Brown's column in a London newspaper. ''How can I convey to you the disgust which your name awakens in me?'' Hughes asked. ''How can you face yourself knowing how much history, value and savings you have thrown away on your mad, ignorant attempt to merge with a wretched dial-up I.S.P.?'' At least three books have now tried to answer that question, and a fourth is on the way.
''Fools Rush In,'' by Nina Munk, a contributing editor at Vanity Fair, is the best so far. Marrying exemplary reporting with lively, lucid writing, she makes a convincing -- nay, devastating -- case that Levin wrecked the legacy of Henry Luce, the founder of Time Inc., in the service of his ego. Levin wanted to redeem his weak performance at the company's helm with what he liked to call a transforming transaction.
He had already transformed Time once, in 1990, when he helped engineer its merger with Warner Communications. That was another lousy deal. What he transformed in the AOL merger was $200 billion of his shareholders' money into nothing.
There is a larger point in Munk's acid portrait. No one stood up to Levin, though many later claimed to have seen the folly of the AOL deal. Levin had become, in his own words, an ''imperial C.E.O.'' Such chief executives, abetted by pliant boards, submissive underlings and craven accountants, bankers and lawyers, have the sort of arbitrary power of which despots can only dream.
Levin, who provided plenty of access to the authors of all three of the books on the merger, does not come off well in any of them, but he reserved his flakiest comments for Munk. ''It's absolutely true that I plotted the departure of Nick Nicholas after working with him for 20 years,'' Levin told her about the palace coup that got him the top job at Time Warner in 1992. ''And I don't have justifications for it other than that I'm a strange person.'' He did cite Albert Camus by way of explanation. As he explained to Munk in another context, his own philosophy was rooted in what he learned from Camus: ''That we impute meaning and purpose to things that are totally adventitious or accidental; that there is no God; that there just is; that there's no life after death.'' Fine for grad school, and probably true, but not exactly suited to the boardroom.
Levin's counterpart at AOL, Stephen M. Case, is famously bland, a vague and uninteresting figure. He likes khakis and expensive wine, and it is a good bet that he hasn't been reading much Camus lately. Levin has called him an ''automaton,'' with ''no spirituality.''
But Case was a good judge of character. In approaching Levin about the merger, he immediately offered to make Levin chief executive officer. ''If he'd said anything else, there's no way I would have gone ahead,'' Levin told Munk (minus a swear word for emphasis between ''no'' and ''way'').
Levin is gone now, having resigned from the company in December 2001. Case remains on its board, though he stepped down as chairman in May 2003. Time Warner reclaimed its maiden name last October. Case remains very rich, having sold hundreds of millions of dollars worth of AOL stock just before and during the merger. Levin was not a seller, and he rode the stock all the way down. That is a testament to his integrity and his obtuseness both.
''Stealing Time,'' another book about the merger, by Alec Klein of The Washington Post, came out last summer. It is a meaty, brisk and conventional work, based on Klein's vigorous investigation of AOL's unorthodox accounting methods. Klein's achievements really come to life, oddly, in Munk's book. In a riveting passage, Munk describes AOL Time Warner's disgraceful efforts to bully The Post into spiking Klein's articles. The company, itself the home of some of the nation's most respected journalists and a supposed friend of the First Amendment, reacted to questions from Klein by hiring one of the nation's most feared libel lawyers, Thomas Yannucci, and threatening to sue. The shameful episode captures in an anecdote Levin's folly in allowing AOL's corrosive values to find a home in his company. The Post, needless to say, did not bend.
With ''There Must Be a Pony in Here Somewhere,'' Kara Swisher, a technology columnist for The Wall Street Journal, has written a breezy, entertaining and glib book about ''the AOL Time Warner debacle,'' but it is only nominally about the merger. The deal, in Swisher's hands, is an occasion for remarks, and her book is a memoir and a manifesto. Its real burden is to make the case that, failed mergers and market collapses or no, the Internet is still important.
Swisher was a regular participant in many conferences devoted to the digital era. (Those conferences were the only consistently profitable product generated by the Internet economy.) Her book sometimes reads like comments from the dais. ''I am still a believer,'' she writes. ''In the wake of the crash, true faith in the eventual dominance of the Internet is not an easy thing to admit to. In fact, largely because of this one disastrous deal, saying you believe in the Internet as a revolutionary medium is a bit like admitting to a capital crime.''
The books by Swisher and Klein are lopsided, focused predominantly on AOL, the less interesting of the two companies. Munk is more balanced, and her digging went deeper. Sometimes, indeed, she provides too much detail: the precise amount of the mortgage payments Levin's parents made in 1932, the brand of hair gel used by an AOL salesman.
Swisher insists that AOL deserves a place in history, at least, ''by popularizing the online experience'' over the telephone. But there is no future in that, and AOL has not shown itself to be at all nimble in finding a way to make money from people who connect to the Internet at higher speeds. Swisher provides the better portrait of Ted Turner, by far the most interesting and authentic figure in the saga. Turner sold CNN and the rest of his cable empire to Time Warner in 1995 and lost $7 billion as the stock sank after the AOL merger. He was, Swisher writes, ''the voluble weather vane of the deal.''
Swisher's book's title is taken from a joke President Reagan liked to tell, later adopted by an AOL executive. Its upshot was an exclamation made by an optimistic boy encountering a pile of manure. One supposes she is making fun of Levin, Case and others, elbow deep in the synergistic muck, hoping to find something of value. But the title captures something of Swisher's own attitude. She remains, she says over and over, thoroughly optimistic about the transformative power of the Internet.
She has absorbed the jargon, certainly. Companies compete ''in the interactive space.'' Time Warner was at one point ''sniffing around the portal space.'' At another, it was ''nowhere to be found in the Internet space.'' AOL, on the other hand, was trying ''to break into the enterprise space.'' One wishes that Swisher, whose book is quite readable, had spent a little more time in the journalism space.
Adam Liptak is the national legal correspondent of The Times.
	There is much common ground between many proponents and opponents of gay marriage. What matters, they say, is not whether the government may give gay couples who commit themselves to lasting partnerships the same bundle of benefits and burdens it gives straight couples who marry. What matters is the word used to describe the bundle.
''We have,'' wrote Justice Martha B. Sosman of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court in a dissent last week, ''a pitched battle over who gets to use the 'm' word.''
In that decision, the court made clear that, starting in May, gay couples can marry in the state. Proposed amendments to the state Constitution, assuming they clear several hurdles, may forbid such marriages starting in late 2006 and perhaps withdraw the m-word from any gay couples who were married in the interim. By then, some couples may have celebrated their second wedding anniversaries.
That ''retroactive demotion,'' in the words of Laurence H. Tribe, the Harvard law professor, could lead to numerous legal challenges. But those challenges, too, would largely be over symbols rather than substance.
''It's remarkable that the fallback position in Massachusetts is full legal rights by another name,'' said William B. Rubenstein, a law professor at the University of California, Los Angeles.
When the highest court in Massachusetts ruled that civil unions are an inadequate substitute for marriage, it also made clear that the rights associated with such unions are required under the state Constitution, though insufficient if not called marriage.
That means that unless a state constitutional amendment banned or limited civil unions -- and none of those under consideration do -- that aspect of the decision would stand. And the remaining argument would be about names.
Whether called a marriage or something else, Justice Sosman wrote, ''same-sex couples who are civilly 'united' will have literally every single right, privilege, benefit and obligation of every sort that our state law confers on opposite-sex couples who are civilly 'married.' ''
Gay rights advocates, and the majority in the 4-to-3 decision, said words are symbols and symbols matter.
''The dissimilitude between the terms 'civil marriage' and 'civil union' is not innocuous,'' Chief Justice Margaret H. Marshall wrote. ''It is a considered choice of language that reflects a demonstrable assigning of same-sex, largely homosexual, couples to second-class status.''
Lawyers for gay couples add that marriages are more likely to be recognized in other states than civil unions, though this argument is complicated by about 40 federal and state ''defense of marriage'' laws that say essentially the opposite.
Many defenders of heterosexual marriages stop short of objecting to civil unions. A proposed federal constitutional amendment introduced by Representative Marilyn Musgrave, Republican of Colorado, would reserve marriage and ''the legal incidents thereof'' to heterosexual couples and forbid the sanctioning of gay marriages. But a spokesman for Ms. Musgrave said the amendment would let states make their own decisions about civil unions.
Proposals for a compromise in Massachusetts that would take effect sooner than 2006 also make plain that the argument is in large part about nomenclature, not formal equality.
Justice Sosman proposed renaming all unions.
''Rather than imbuing the word 'marriage' with constitutional significance, there is much to be said for the argument that the secular legal institution, which has gradually come to mean something very different from its original religious counterpart, be given a name that distinguishes it from the religious sacrament of 'marriage,' '' she wrote. ''The legislature could, rationally and permissibly, decide that the time has come to jettison the term.''
The majority seemed to agree. A new name for all unions, Chief Justice Marshall wrote, ''might well be rational and permissible.''
Douglas W. Kmiec and Mark S. Scarberry, law professors at Pepperdine University, suggested in a recent column that Massachusetts could ''temporarily get out of the new marriage business entirely.'' This would treat gay and straight couples equally, though heterosexuals could still be married in other states, and would not require the state to withdraw marriage licenses from gay couples in 2006 if a constitutional amendment took effect.
''Massachusetts needs some time for cooler heads to prevail,'' Mr. Kmiec said in an interview. ''Legislators could say, 'We're going to close the civil marriage window in Massachusetts.' ''
Whatever happens in Massachusetts is unlikely to be required to be recognized elsewhere, legal experts said, though perhaps not for the most obvious reason. The various federal and state defense-of-marriage laws, they said, add little to existing constitutional principles and, if they do, may themselves be unconstitutional.
But the requirement that states acknowledge and enforce other states' public acts, records and judicial proceedings under the federal Constitution's ''full faith and credit'' clause is not absolute.
''No state has ever had an obligation to give credence to a judgment of another state that cuts deeply against the articulated public policy of the receiving state,'' Mr. Kmiec said. Laws that prohibit the recognition of gay marriages from other states are thus in one sense unconstitutional and in another an expression of the state's public policy.
Gay rights advocates say that, symbols aside, they would rather litigate cases about the recognition of marriage to those about civil unions.
''The concept of civil union exists in only one state,'' said Michael Adams, a lawyer with Lambda Legal. ''Couples who enter into civil unions in Vermont have had tremendous problems in getting any kind of recognition across state lines. We believe that gay and lesbian couples who are married stand on more solid ground in seeking recognition in other states.''
Mr. Rubenstein, who has written a treatise on sexual orientation and the law, had one prediction about the lawsuits that will follow the court decisions and legislation in Massachusetts. ''The only thing I can say for sure,'' he said, ''is that it's like a full employment act for lawyers.''
	