Sealed in a studio without a television camera in sight, six of the Democratic presidential candidates engaged in an unusual radio-only debate on Tuesday, and promptly revealed a sharp distinction that is dividing the field: Whether to raise taxes on middle-class Americans.
In an intense series of exchanges, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut-- talking from under a set of radio headphones -- hammered Howard Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri for proposing to reverse middle-class tax cuts passed under President Bush.
The medium might have been different, but the discussion, even under the famously decorous auspices of National Public Radio, was appropriately intense for this competition. And it showed how an issue that many Democrats thought would not generate much heat until the general election against Mr. Bush -- tax cuts -- was emerging as a dividing line between the candidates in Iowa.
Mr. Kerry has proposed eliminating the tax cuts that benefited wealthy Americans but not the cuts that benefited the middle-class. To dramatize his criticism of Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt, he repeatedly invoked the plight of two Iowa residents, divulging to the listening audience their incomes and potential new tax bills should Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt have their way.
''You're going to add to those people's burden the taking away the child credit, taking away the 10 percent bracket,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''Everybody in Iowa will pay additional taxes at 15 percent and the marriage penalty be reinstated.
''Now, there's a terrific message: Democrats in America if you get married, you ought to pay more taxes.''
Mr. Lieberman, who again flew to Iowa to engage in a debate where he could draw a contrast with Dr. Dean, lined up with Mr. Kerry.
''I don't know of a case where a Democratic candidate for president has been elected who called for a massive increase in taxes on the middle class,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''These are our people. This is what America is all about. They are hurting more today than I've ever seen them hurting in my adult life.''
The attacks were focused mostly on Dr. Dean, who moved quickly to remind listeners that he was not alone in calling for the repeal of the Bush tax cuts -- or, as his opponents describe it, raising taxes. ''I'll take that and then I hope Dick responds because we're on the same side on this one as well,'' he said.
But for the most part, Dr. Dean was alone as he defended his position and scolded his opponents for promising voters all kinds of programs along with a tax cut.
''What John just said is hogwash,'' said Dr. Dean.
''You cannot promise people tax cuts, college education, health care and whatever else you want, and say, 'Oh, it'll all be fine,' '' Dr. Dean said. ''That's what George Bush is doing. I want fiscal responsibility in this country, but I want to help middle-class people send their kids to college. You cannot have tax cuts and help people send their kids to college at the same time.''
The debate was unusual even in a year where there have been, by some counts, more than 30 debates, that have left the candidates numb and familiar with each other's positions. It was, according to National Public Radio, the first radio-only presidential debate since Harold Stassen and Thomas E. Dewey competed for the Republican nomination in 1948.
The candidates were seated in a room without an audience to applaud or heckle them. At one point, Representative Dennis A. Kucinich of Ohio used a prop more suited for a television venue as a way demonstrating to Dr. Dean that he could not reduce the deficit without cutting Pentagon spending, drawing an incredulous if helpful bit of narration from the host.
''Congressman Kucinich is holding up a pie chart, which is not truly effective on the radio,'' said Neal Conan, the host of ''Talk of the Nation'' and the moderator of the debate.
''Well, it's effective if Howard can see it,'' Mr. Kucinich said.
Mr. Gephardt argued that that the repeal of the tax cut was an appropriate trade-off to finance the national health care plan he has made a central part of his campaign.
''I think that we need to help everybody with health care insurance,'' he said.
Of the remaining candidates, General Wesley K. Clark has decided not to compete in Iowa after concluding he would fare poorly here, and thus skipped the debate. On Monday he issued a tax proposal that would cut taxes on the poor and middle class, while substantially raising the burden on millionaires.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina spent the day campaigning across the state, after concluding that attending a two-hour radio debate in downtown Des Moines was not the best use of his time.''
Mr. Lieberman, who like General Clark is not competing here, argued that Dr. Dean was polarizing the nation with his intense attacks on Mr. Bush and appeals to Democratic partisanship. He said that Dr. Dean would lead the party to defeat with that kind of appeal.
''Howard Dean has said a number of things that are polarizing,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''He has represented anger. Anger has fueled his campaign.''
''I love the enthusiasm of his supporters,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''He's done an incredible service to our party and our political system by bringing a lot of them in, but we've got to go beyond that.''
Dr. Dean responded by noting that he had won the endorsement of both Bill Bradley, who flew with Dr. Dean here on Tuesday, and Al Gore, the Democrats who ran against each other for president in 2000. ''If I can begin to breach the gap between Bill Bradley and Al Gore, and bring in people who have served long periods of time in Washington, and all the enthusiastic supporters we have, then I think I may be the right candidate to beat George Bush,'' he said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: DEBATE
	Karl Rove, the president's chief political adviser, gave nervous Republicans here a preview on Friday of the party's strategy to maintain its dominance in the fall elections, offering a searing attack on Democrats for their positions on terrorism, the administration's eavesdropping program and President Bush's effort to shape the federal judiciary.
Mr. Rove called for civility in politics in his speech to the Republican National Committee, and then for 26 minutes offered a lacerating attack on Democrats that other Republicans said was a road map for how the party would deal with a tough electoral environment as it battled to retain control of both houses of Congress.
In a speech that drew several bursts of strong applause, Mr. Rove criticized Democrats for their opposition to tax cuts and for what he called ''mean-spirited'' attacks on Judge Samuel A. Alito Jr., Mr. Bush's Supreme Court nominee. And he left little doubt that in 2006 -- as in both nationwide elections since the Sept. 11 attacks -- he was intent on making national security the pre-eminent issue.
Mr. Rove's speeches early in election years have proved to be accurate predictors of what Republican candidates will say in the fall, and thus every seat in the ballroom at a downtown Washington hotel was filled Friday.
Mr. Rove criticized Democrats for what he described as their ''cut and run'' policy on Iraq, for blocking a renewal of the antiterrorism law known as the USA Patriot Act and for challenging the legality of the administration's use of wiretaps without warrants.
But he made no mention of Republican opposition to aspects of both the antiterrorism law and the surveillance program, which has posed a political problem for the White House.
''The United States faces a ruthless enemy,'' Mr. Rove said, ''and we need a commander in chief and a Congress who understand the nature of the threat and the gravity of the moment America finds itself in. President Bush and the Republican Party do. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said for many Democrats.''
''Let me be as clear as I can be. President Bush believes if Al Qaeda is calling somebody in America, it is in our national security interest to know who they're calling and why,'' he said, referring to the wiretapping program. ''Some important Democrats clearly disagree.''
The speech was a relatively rare public address by one of the best-known public officials in the White House and came at a time when Mr. Rove is under investigation in a case involving the leak to reporters of the name of a C.I.A. operative.
In his speech, Mr. Rove made no mention of his own legal situation. And even as he sought to rally his troops, he did not mention an issue that accounts for much of the Republican concern about the fall election: the influence-peddling investigation of Congress that has focused on some senior Republican leaders, including Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, who has stepped down as majority leader.
The issue of ethics was left to Ken Mehlman, the chairman of the Republican National Committee. Mr. Mehlman condemned Republicans implicated in any scandals, though he sought -- as part of a Republican strategy this week -- to place some blame on Democrats for the investigations swirling around Congress.
''Public service is a sacred trust, and we cannot allow it to be sullied by anyone, Republican or Democrat,'' he said. ''As Republican chairman, I am proud of my party and loyal to our members. But if Republicans are guilty of illegal or inappropriate behavior, they should pay the price and suffer the consequences.''
Howard Dean, the national Democratic leader, responded to Mr. Rove's attacks by noting the investigation into his activities and challenging Mr. Bush's decision to keep him in the White House, even as the investigation proceeds.
''Rove's political standing gets him an invitation to address Republicans in Washington, D.C., today,'' Mr. Dean said, ''but it doesn't give him the credibility to question Democrats' commitment to national security. The truth is, Karl Rove breached our national security for partisan gain, and that is both unpatriotic and wrong.''
The White House's increasingly forceful defense of the eavesdropping program signals its belief that the disclosures are not politically damaging, notwithstanding criticism. Some polls so far suggest that Americans are supportive of the eavesdropping campaign.
For all his bullishness, Mr. Rove got a reminder Friday that his party is not as united as it once was.
Some Republicans at the meeting tried to push through a resolution condemning illegal immigration that explicitly broke with Mr. Bush's support for allowing illegal immigrants to participate in guest-worker programs. This issue has proved vexing for the party as it tries to expand its appeal to Hispanics while not alienating voters angered by the flow of illegal immigrants.
Randall L. Pullen of Arizona, the sponsor of the resolution, pulled it back after an officially sanctioned resolution reflecting Mr. Bush's immigration policy passed with a single dissent.
	Senator John Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat who narrowly lost the presidency to President Bush in 2004, announced Wednesday that he would not proceed with a second bid for the White House, saying he preferred to use his position in the new Senate majority to press for an end to American involvement in Iraq.
''We came close, certainly close enough to be tempted to try again,'' Mr. Kerry said, invoking his 2004 race, at the conclusion of a 30-minute speech attacking Mr. Bush's Iraq policy on the Senate floor. ''There are powerful reasons to want to continue that fight now. But I've concluded that this isn't the time for me to mount a presidential campaign. It is the time to put my energy to work as part of the majority of the Senate and do all I can to end the war.''
Mr. Kerry's announcement, though it came in an unorthodox place, was not a surprise.
He was bowing to a Democratic Party that was clearly unreceptive and had turned its attention to new candidates, in particular Senators Barack Obama of Illinois and Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, who both got into the race this month. Many Democrats had said they expected that Mr. Kerry would decide not to run after assessing how much support he had in his party. Already, most of his aides from the 2004 campaign have moved on.
Still, his decision sent ripples across the political waters, answering one more question about what the final Democratic field might look like.
More than that, it appeared to bring to completion a candidacy that for Mr. Kerry never truly ended after that Election Day in 2004 which began with exit polls showing him heading for a solid victory -- aides were addressing him as Mr. President -- and ended with his making a concession call to Mr. Bush. That experience, friends said, left Mr. Kerry bitter and frustrated and eager for a rematch.
He used his time on the Senate floor to recount his history as a Vietnam veteran who returned from war nearly 40 years ago to become an opponent of the conflict. His voice cracking with emotion, he drew frequent comparisons between the two wars as he made a case against Mr. Bush's foreign policy in the Middle East.
''The fact is, what happens here in the next two years may irrevocably shape or terribly distort the administration of whichever candidate is next elected president,'' he said, adding, ''I don't want the next president to find that they have inherited a nation still divided and a policy destined to end as Vietnam did.''
Mr. Kerry's speech drew tributes from fellow Democrats, including the senior Democrat from Massachusetts, Senator Edward M. Kennedy, who had been pushing Mr. Kerry to make a decision.
Another Democratic senator running for president, Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, said: ''My initial reaction to Senator Kerry's decision is one of extreme sadness. John Kerry is a major voice in American politics, and the country would be much better off today if he were president.''
Mr. Kerry made his announcement at 3 p.m. in a Senate chamber that, other than two senators -- Mr. Kennedy and Harry Reid, the majority leader -- was almost empty.
Mr. Kerry, 63, intends to run for a fifth term in the Senate in 2008, an aide said.
The senator, in his travels around the country since the election, has argued that he came close to winning in 2004 and would be a better candidate, with extra experience, in 2008.
After being taunted in the 2004 race as being equivocal on the war in Iraq, he had emerged as one of his party's leading opponents to the war, and had renounced his original support for the war resolution that caused him so many problems in the 2004 election.
But Mr. Kerry faced severe obstacles in trying to capture his party's nomination for a second time. For one thing, many of his supporters had made clear that they would not join him again, with many saying he had made mistakes in 2004 that cleared the way for Mr. Bush to win.
Mr. Kerry also faced an unusually strong and deep field of Democratic contenders, including Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Obama and Mr. Kerry's running mate from 2004, John Edwards, the former senator from North Carolina.
But Mr. Kerry's hopes were probably most damaged by what he said was a botched joke he told while campaigning on behalf of Congressional candidates in the final week of the 2006 election campaigns.
Mr. Kerry's prepared remarks called for him to say, ''Do you know where you end up if you don't study, if you aren't smart, if you're intellectually lazy? You end up getting us stuck in a war in Iraq. Just ask President Bush.'' In his delivery, he dropped the word ''us.''
Republicans argued that he had delivered a joke at the expense of American troops fighting in Iraq.
Mr. Kerry responded by getting off the campaign trail and out of public view.
For many Democrats, the remark was a reminder of instances of ineptness by Mr. Kerry as a campaigner, including his often troubled efforts to explain his changing views on the war in Iraq. Most famously, he said that he had voted for an $87 billion war appropriation ''before I voted against it,'' a piece of videotape that Republicans quickly turned into a defining caricature of him.
Correction:  January 26, 2007, Friday  An article yesterday about Senator John Kerry's announcement that he would not seek the Democratic nomination for president in 2008 incorrectly described what he called ''a botched joke'' he told before the November midterm elections. In telling the joke, which was assailed as an attack on American troops fighting in Iraq, Mr. Kerry not only dropped a word from his prepared remarks, but he also rephrased his opening sentence extensively and omitted a reference to President Bush. Mr. Kerry's aides said that the prepared text read: ''Do you know where you end up if you don't study, if you aren't smart, if you're intellectually lazy? You end up getting us stuck in a war in Iraq. Just ask President Bush.'' What he actually said: ''You know, education, if you make the most of it, you study hard, you do your homework and you make an effort to be smart, you can do well. If you don't, you get stuck in Iraq.''
	