On a summer day a few years ago, a recent college graduate named Emily Oster was talking to her boyfriend about the research that was, and wasn't, being done on the spread of AIDS. She was an aspiring economist at the time, getting ready to go to graduate school, and she was struck by the fact that her field had little to say about why some countries had such high H.I.V. rates.
To most people, that may not sound like a question an economist needs to be asking. It's more the domain of epidemiologists or public health workers, and they were already doing good work on it.
But economists have been acting a lot like intellectual imperialists in the last decade or so. They have been using their tools -- mainly the analysis of enormous piles of data to tease out cause and effect -- to examine everything from politics to French wine vintages.
As the daughter of two economists, Ms. Oster probably understood this better than most 22-year-olds. Her father, Ray Fair, invented a semi-famous economic formula that has an impressive track record of predicting presidential elections. Her mother, Sharon Oster, studies business strategy.
So during her time as a Ph.D. student at Harvard, the younger Ms. Oster took on AIDS in Africa. Her most provocative finding was that Africans didn't really behave so differently from people in countries with much lower H.I.V. rates. They did not have many more sexual partners than Americans on average. And, like Americans, Africans had cut back on unsafe sex in response to AIDS -- or at least relatively well-off, healthy Africans had.
Poorer Africans, who of course make up the continent's overwhelming majority, had made fewer changes. They had less of an incentive to practice safe sex, Ms. Oster concluded, because many of them could not expect to reach old age, whether or not they contracted H.I.V. Any attack on AIDS should therefore include an attack on poverty.
''This is not the kind of thing epidemiologists would do. It's not the way they would have framed it,'' Ms. Oster, now 26, said. ''It's an idea only an economist would love.''
Whatever you think of her conclusions, there's no denying that her subject is more interesting -- and, yes, more important -- than the esoteric fiscal and monetary models that once dominated economics. Ms. Oster is studying death, not taxes.
Last weekend, hundreds of economists gathered in Chicago for their annual conference, where they interviewed one another for job openings, presented new research papers and had the occasional glass of wine. This was my sixth such conference, and I have often been stunned by how much of the research here, like Ms. Oster's work, would interest non-economists.
As ''The Soulful Science,'' a new book by Diane Coyle, puts it, there has been a ''remarkable creative renaissance in how economics is addressing the most fundamental questions -- and how it is starting to help solve problems.'' The reams of data that computers can now crunch have ushered the field into a new golden age, Ms. Coyle writes, yet most of its accomplishments are not widely known.
So before this year's conference, I did an informal poll of about 20 senior economists around the country and asked a single question: who are the young (untenured) economists doing work that is both highly respected among experts and relevant to the rest of us? Who, in other words, is the future of economics?
Thirteen names came up more than once, and I'm sure a scientific survey would have produced a longer list. As it is, though, the list is incredibly diverse. It includes Justin Wolfers, who once worked for an Australian bookie and is now an expert on online prediction markets , and Raj Chetty, who grew up in both India and Milwaukee and studies antipoverty policy.
Ms. Oster is on the list, and so is the boyfriend with whom she first discussed her AIDS ideas: Jesse Shapiro, now her husband. He has done innovative work on, among other things, the benefits of television for some toddlers. The two of them are the inaugural fellows at a University of Chicago research center run by Gary Becker (a Nobel laureate), Steven Levitt (co-author of ''Freaknomoics'') and Kevin Murphy (winner of a MacArthur genius award).
In fact, the least diverse aspect of the list of 13 -- the full roster appears above -- may be the way that its members have chosen their mates. Six of them are married to another person in the group.
In the end, this new era of economics matters because it has a chance to influence the world that is its subject matter. Ms. Oster, for example, has presented her work to the President's Commission on AIDS and others, and her findings seem to be one small part of the recent push for better H.I.V. prevention measures.
In Massachusetts, a 41-year-old economist named Jonathan Gruber helped design the new state program to provide health insurance for every resident, which is a model for the California plan announced on Monday. The new federal pension law, meanwhile, encourages employers to sign up workers automatically for 401(k) plans largely because academic research has shown just how costly procrastination is.
For all this success, though, there are still two big obstacles holding back the economics revolution. The first is that the field remains too narrow in its approach. As David Colander, an economist at Middlebury College, notes, researchers are rewarded -- with job offers, endowed chairs and prizes -- for finding statistically significant patterns that can be published in prestigious journals. They're generally not rewarded for collaborating with experts in other fields to put those patterns into better context.
As a result, there is too much ''cleverness for cleverness's sake,'' Mr. Colander says, and not enough ''judgment and wisdom.''
The second obstacle is that when economists do uncover a nugget of true wisdom, they're often hesitant to follow it to its natural conclusion and to become principled advocates for better policy. Theirs is not to judge, they insist, only to report what they find. Otherwise, they may risk their reputation for impartial research.
Which is a fair point. But it's a risk worth taking, because the alternative is frankly much worse.
When David Hume, the philosopher and friend of Adam Smith, called for the establishment of a ''science of human nature'' in the 18th century, he helped invent modern economics. The new generation of researchers will probably come closer to realizing his vision, and to making economics a true science, than any of their predecessors.
But think about what scientists do when they uncover a problem: they try to solve it. To do otherwise is to let an impressive piece of research turn into a scientifically rigorous piece of trivia.
ECONOMIX
	The human mind isn't very well equipped to make sense of a figure like $1.2 trillion. We don't deal with a trillion of anything in our daily lives, and so when we come across such a big number, it is hard to distinguish it from any other big number. Millions, billions, a trillion -- they all start to sound the same.
The way to come to grips with $1.2 trillion is to forget about the number itself and think instead about what you could buy with the money. When you do that, a trillion stops sounding anything like millions or billions.
For starters, $1.2 trillion would pay for an unprecedented public health campaign -- a doubling of cancer research funding, treatment for every American whose diabetes or heart disease is now going unmanaged and a global immunization campaign to save millions of children's lives.
Combined, the cost of running those programs for a decade wouldn't use up even half our money pot. So we could then turn to poverty and education, starting with universal preschool for every 3- and 4-year-old child across the country. The city of New Orleans could also receive a huge increase in reconstruction funds.
The final big chunk of the money could go to national security. The recommendations of the 9/11 Commission  that have not been put in place -- better baggage and cargo screening, stronger measures against nuclear proliferation -- could be enacted. Financing for the war in Afghanistan could be increased to beat back the Taliban's recent gains, and a peacekeeping force could put a stop to the genocide in Darfur.
All that would be one way to spend $1.2 trillion. Here would be another:
The war in Iraq.
In the days before the war almost five years ago, the Pentagon estimated that it would cost about $50 billion. Democratic staff members in Congress largely agreed.
Lawrence Lindsey, a White House economic adviser, was a bit more realistic, predicting that the cost could go as high as $200 billion, but President Bush fired him in part for saying so.
These estimates probably would have turned out to be too optimistic even if the war had gone well. Throughout history, people have typically underestimated the cost of war, as William Nordhaus, a Yale economist, has pointed out.
But the deteriorating situation in Iraq has caused the initial predictions to be off the mark by a scale that is difficult to fathom. The operation itself -- the helicopters, the tanks, the fuel needed to run them, the combat pay for enlisted troops, the salaries of reservists and contractors, the rebuilding of Iraq -- is costing more than $300 million a day, estimates Scott Wallsten, an economist in Washington.
That translates into a couple of billion dollars a week and, over the full course of the war, an eventual total of $700 billion in direct spending.
The two best-known analyses of the war's costs agree on this figure, but they diverge from there. Linda Bilmes, at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard, and Joseph Stiglitz, a Nobel laureate and former Clinton administration adviser, put a total price tag of more than $2 trillion  on the war. They include a number of indirect costs, like the economic stimulus that the war funds would have provided if they had been spent in this country.
Mr. Wallsten, who worked with Katrina Kosec, another economist, argues for a figure closer to $1 trillion in today's dollars. My own estimate falls on the conservative side, largely because it focuses on the actual money that Americans would have been able to spend in the absence of a war. I didn't even attempt to put a monetary value on the more than 3,000 American deaths in the war.
Besides the direct military spending, I'm including the gas tax that the war has effectively imposed on American families (to the benefit of oil-producing countries like Iran, Russia and Saudi Arabia). At the start of 2003, a barrel of oil was selling for $30. Since then, the average price has been about $50. Attributing even $5 of this difference to the conflict adds another $150 billion to the war's price tag, Ms. Bilmes and Mr. Stiglitz say.
The war has also guaranteed some big future expenses. Replacing the hardware used in Iraq and otherwise getting the United States military back into its prewar fighting shape could cost $100 billion. And if this war's veterans receive disability payments and medical care at the same rate as veterans of the first gulf war, their health costs will add up to $250 billion. If the disability rate matches Vietnam's, the number climbs higher. Either way, Ms. Bilmes says, ''It's like a miniature Medicare.''
In economic terms, you can think of these medical costs as the difference between how productive the soldiers would have been as, say, computer programmers or firefighters and how productive they will be as wounded veterans. In human terms, you can think of soldiers like Jason Poole, a young corporal profiled in The New York Times last year. Before the war, he had planned to be a teacher. After being hit by a roadside bomb in 2004, he spent hundreds of hours learning to walk and talk again, and he now splits his time between a community college and a hospital in Northern California.
Whatever number you use for the war's total cost, it will tower over costs that normally seem prohibitive. Right now, including everything, the war is costing about $200 billion a year.
Treating heart disease and diabetes, by contrast, would probably cost about $50 billion a year. The remaining 9/11 Commission recommendations -- held up in Congress partly because of their cost -- might cost somewhat less. Universal preschool would be $35 billion. In Afghanistan, $10 billion could make a real difference. At the National Cancer Institute, annual budget is about $6 billion.
''This war has skewed our thinking about resources,'' said Mr. Wallsten, a senior fellow at the Progress and Freedom Foundation, a conservative-leaning research group. ''In the context of the war, $20 billion is nothing.''
As it happens, $20 billion is not a bad ballpark estimate for the added cost of Mr. Bush's planned surge in troops. By itself, of course, that price tag doesn't mean the surge is a bad idea. If it offers the best chance to stabilize Iraq, then it may well be the right option.
But the standard shouldn't simply be whether a surge is better than the most popular alternative -- a far-less-expensive political strategy that includes getting tough with the Iraqi government. The standard should be whether the surge would be better than the political strategy plus whatever else might be accomplished with the $20 billion.
This time, it would be nice to have that discussion before the troops reach Iraq.
ECONOMIX
	Arthur Agatston, the South Beach diet doctor, came to town last week and, in between bites of filleted fish, he was trying to persuade me that his patients rarely have heart attacks anymore.
As he is quick to tell almost anyone -- as he told me before we had even sat down for our Greek lunch -- he is an accidental diet doctor. By training, he's a cardiologist. He spent 20 years doing research and seeing patients in Miami before his little nutrition manifesto was published in 2003. It and its various spinoffs have since sold close to 20 million copies.
But Dr. Agatston still spends much of his time as a working cardiologist. After the first book came out, he opened a private practice where he treats everyone from locals who knew him when he was just another doctor to wealthy South Americans who fly in to see the famous South Beach doctor.
The practice has 2,800 patients, and, as best as Dr. Agatston can recall, only three of them had a heart attack last year. ''Heart attacks are essentially disappearing from my practice,'' he says in his Long Island-tinged accent.
It is a fairly stunning claim, the sort of claim that you might expect to hear from someone who knows how to sell a product. If Dr. Agatston were to do a thorough review of his files, I wonder if he might come across a few more heart attacks, perhaps among patients he doesn't see regularly.
But his larger point is a perfectly good one: we now know an enormous amount about how to prevent heart attacks, with powerful drugs like statins, smoking cessation, exercise and diet. With the right preventive care, people can cut their risk of a heart attack by up to 80 percent, cardiologists estimate.
''We have made major improvements in prevention,'' Dr. Gregg W. Stone , the director of cardiovascular research at Columbia University, says. ''But it's difficult. It takes frequent visits, a close relationship between a physician and a patient and a very committed patient.''
Which is exactly the atmosphere Dr. Agatston's practice tries to create. Nurses there give patients specific cholesterol goals to meet and help them deal with the side effects of the drugs they are taking. A nutritionist, Marie Almon, meets with patients frequently enough to discuss real-life issues like how to stick to a high-fiber Mediterranean diet even on a cruise or a business trip.
There is only one problem with this shining example of a medical practice: it is losing money.
See, preventive medicine just doesn't pay in the current American medical system. ''The time we spend with patients -- we get rewarded almost zilch,'' Dr. Agatston says. Or as Dr. Valentin Fuster, a former president of the American Heart Association, puts it: ''There is no incentive at all. It's a disaster.''
This is obviously an exciting time for health care reform. In California and Massachusetts, state officials have announced plans to provide universal health insurance. Last week, the head of the Business Roundtable, a major corporate lobbying group, and Andy Stern, a union leader, held a news conference  together to call for universal coverage. President Bush devoted a big part of last night's State of the Union address to his own health insurance ideas. The push to reduce the number of uninsured, now approaching 50 million, is long overdue.
But a lack of insurance is only one of the two huge problems with health care. The other is the perverse system of incentives that nudges doctors and patients toward expensive tests and procedures when cheaper preventive measures might actually produce better results. Partly as a result, costs are rising rapidly for the 250 million people who do have insurance.
In cardiac care, nuclear scans and invasive procedures like bypass surgery bring in the money. Medicare alone paid almost $15 billion, or about 5 percent of its total budget, for bypasses, stents and other invasive cardiology in 2005, according to Jonathan Skinner  of Dartmouth. Yet for many patients, there is no scientific evidence  that stents or surgery prolong life.
Dr. Agatston doesn't need Medicare reimbursements to make a living. His books, the latest being ''The South Beach Heart Program,'' have given him ''an outside income,'' as he delicately puts it. ''I can afford to be holier than thou,'' he says.
Absent a wealthy patron, many other clinics that focus on preventing heart disease are struggling to survive, Dr. Richard Pasternak, a Harvard Medical School cardiologist and Merck & Company executive, says. Family doctors, doctors who treat back pain and doctors who treat diabetes all face similar challenges.
It's important to note that the economic gains from preventive care are sometimes exaggerated. Sadly, the cheapest patients are often the ones who receive no care whatsoever, because many die before they reach their medically expensive golden years.
But the political case -- the moral case -- for prevention is unassailable. And to the extent that drugs and lifestyle changes replace surgery, rather than merely supplement it, preventive care can help pay for itself.
Given the way the universal insurance movement has taken off, the most likely path to reform probably runs through local governments or other pilot programs, and some of this is beginning to happen.
Humana, the insurer, and Dr. Fuster will soon begin studying 6,000 high-risk patients, in part to get a better understanding of how they can be persuaded to take the preventive steps they should be taking. Medicare, meanwhile, is experimenting with some pay-for-performance stipends for doctors.
''We still pay more when patients have more complications and get more services than when they get better results,'' Dr. Mark McClellan, Medicare's former director, told me recently.
The prevention push is still waiting for its Massachusetts moment -- a signature event to make it a topic of national conversation, as Massachusetts's health insurance plan did for universal coverage last year. Dr. Agatston, who does have a track record of getting people's attention, has one idea.
''My dream has been to go to a corporation and say, 'Have all your executives and all your high-risk employees come to our practice, and if they hit our goals and still have a heart attack, we'll give you a million dollars,' '' Dr. Agatston said. ''My wife and our lawyers say, 'You can't do that!' But that's frankly my dream.''
Any takers?
ECONOMIX
	