East of the waterfront, up on South Jackson Street, past the International District and at the base of a steep hill in the Central area, looms a giant red Wonder Bread sign.
A lonely piece of Americana, the neon sign is perched atop a shuttered bakery in a neighborhood of boarded-up stores and more than a few depressed, empty streets. Beyond the broader neighborhood implications of the factory's imminent demolition and replacement with housing and shops is the prickly question of what happens to the sign.
The San Diego company that is developing the 1.6-acre property said the sign would be donated to the nearby Pratt Institute of Fine Arts. But that has some neighborhood residents worried that Pratt will auction it off to wealthy collectors. They strongly suspect that ''Wonder Bread,'' or ''Wonder'' or ''Bread'' -- or just ''W'' or ''B,'' for that matter -- would be a hot commodity for the growing set of neon industrial art aficionados.
Old neon industrial signs are in the midst of a renaissance, especially across the Northwest and in Los Angeles. Seattle is on the cutting edge of this scene, mostly because the city, already a national leader in historic preservation, did not take down or restored many of the original signs at bustling establishments like the Pike Place Market, founded in 1907, and the Elephant Car Wash, started up in 1951.
Still, some, like the Wonder Bread sign and the neon R for the Rainier Brewing Company, which is now in a neon museum, are no longer hovering above thriving businesses.
Pratt officials did not return telephone calls seeking comment about their plans for the sign. But the executive director, Earl Sedlik, told The Seattle Post-Intelligencer last year, when the sign question first emerged, ''Our artists are eager to inherit the sign -- whether or not it ends up here, I don't know.''
Mr. Sedlik added that the art center was conducting a fund-raising campaign, ''and as a charitable endeavor, there are ways for us to offer those letters for our needs.''
Bill Bradburd, an artist who moved here from San Francisco, said the Wonder Bread sign was really a symbol of a ''bait and switch'' on the part of city officials. Mr. Bradburd, who lives near the bakery and is a co-chairman of the Jackson Place Community Council, said development was moving at such a fast pace that city officials who had promised to protect the character of Seattle's neighborhoods were instead seizing on the dollars flowing in.
Mr. Bradburd and others on the council want the sign displayed publicly near the site of the bakery. He is at odds with some, though, by proposing the sign be split up, putting ''Read'' over a local library and perhaps ''Wonder'' over a new elementary school.
But is the tension over these 11 red letters, each six feet tall, really about the sign?
''These battles over saving something old are proxy battles,'' said David Brewster, the founder of Town Hall, Seattle's cultural center, who is writing a history of the city since the 1962 World's Fair here. ''They are really battles against traffic, although of course gentrification weighs in.''
Seattle, founded in the 1850's, is still relatively young, Mr. Brewster said.''Where you don't have a lot of history,'' he said, ''you do want to hang onto the little you do have. And where you have a high degree of change, you fear change.''
The city, still recovering from the dot-com bust, is in a young yet remarkable real estate boom. Projections for 2006 construction, said Alan Justad, a spokesman for the city's planning department, outpace 2005, when the city accepted a record $2 billion in residential and commercial building permit applications, with $1.7 billion approved. Much of the development is concentrated downtown under a planning strategy known as ''urban density,'' which is intended to prevent sprawl.
But development is also coming soon to neighborhoods like the Central area. Seattle, with a population of 572,000, according to 2006 city figures, and an additional three million people living elsewhere in the metropolitan area, is projecting a population increase within the city limits of at least 100,000 people by 2024.
About half of those would live downtown, Mr. Justad said, with the rest in new housing planned for some of Seattle's 38 neighborhoods, or ''urban villages,'' in planning parlance.
Seattle's neighborhoods are typically quiet, self-contained residential areas with few apartment buildings and far fewer parking headaches than most other major cities.
The downside to the city's decidedly un-urban neighborhoods, for some, is the lack of hustle and bustle, or in the case of the Central area, a largely poor, black neighborhood, outright dilapidation on some of the blocks soon to be redeveloped.
''The bottom line is green; you can't hold back progress,'' said Terry Johnson, 62, who grew up in the neighborhood with Jimi Hendrix and for a time worked at the bakery. ''Development, it's inevitable, and the worse thing you can do is not develop there and just leave them all to grow old poor.''
Even so, the history in the Central area remains so vibrant, the nostalgia so loud, that people who grew up here in the 1950's and 60's say they can still hear the blues and jazz piping out from what was the only black radio show, broadcast for one hour each Sunday night from the back of a local record store.
They remember hearing Hendrix, whose house was three blocks from the factory before being moved to a suburb last year, jamming with his friends on guitars. And they remember the children scrambling after school to the bakery to buy day-old bread for their dinner tables.
''Seeing the cookies and bread on the assembly belts, it was a show,'' said Adrienne Bailey, who grew up near the factory and is now secretary to the Central Area Neighborhood District Council. ''It was a smell blocks before you got there. Oh, I have beautiful childhood memories of Twinkies and pies, and a beautiful big red neon sign, all lit up.''
	